Madame Bovary
By Gustave Flaubert
Translated from the French by Eleanor Marx-Aveling
ToMarie-Antoine-Jules SenardMember of the Paris Bar, Ex-President of the National Assembly, andFormer Minister of the Interior
Dear and Illustrious Friend,
Permit me to inscribe your name at the head of this book, and above itsdedication; for it is to you, before all, that I owe its publication.Reading over your magnificent defence, my work has acquired for myself,as it were, an unexpected authority.
Accept, then, here, the homage of my gratitude, which, how great soeverit is, will never attain the height of your eloquence and yourdevotion.
Gustave Flaubert,
Paris, 12 April 1857
MADAME BOVARY
Part I
Chapter One
We were in class when the head-master came in, followed by a “newfellow,” not wearing the school uniform, and a school servant carrying alarge desk. Those who had been asleep woke up, and every one rose as ifjust surprised at his work.
The head-master made a sign to us to sit down. Then, turning to theclass-master, he said to him in a low voice--
“Monsieur Roger, here is a pupil whom I recommend to your care; he’ll bein the second. If his work and conduct are satisfactory, he will go intoone of the upper classes, as becomes his age.”
The “new fellow,” standing in the corner behind the door so that hecould hardly be seen, was a country lad of about fifteen, and tallerthan any of us. His hair was cut square on his forehead like a villagechorister’s; he looked reliable, but very ill at ease. Although he wasnot broad-shouldered, his short school jacket of green cloth with blackbuttons must have been tight about the arm-holes, and showed at theopening of the cuffs red wrists accustomed to being bare. His legs, inblue stockings, looked out from beneath yellow trousers, drawn tight bybraces, He wore stout, ill-cleaned, hob-nailed boots.
We began repeating the lesson. He listened with all his ears, asattentive as if at a sermon, not daring even to cross his legs or leanon his elbow; and when at two o’clock the bell rang, the master wasobliged to tell him to fall into line with the rest of us.
When we came back to work, we were in the habit of throwing our caps onthe ground so as to have our hands more free; we used from the door totoss them under the form, so that they hit against the wall and made alot of dust: it was “the thing.”
But, whether he had not noticed the trick, or did not dare to attemptit, the “new fellow,” was still holding his cap on his knees even afterprayers were over. It was one of those head-gears of composite order, inwhich we can find traces of the bearskin, shako, billycock hat, sealskincap, and cotton night-cap; one of those poor things, in fine, whosedumb ugliness has depths of expression, like an imbecile’s face. Oval,stiffened with whalebone, it began with three round knobs; then came insuccession lozenges of velvet and rabbit-skin separated by a red band;after that a sort of bag that ended in a cardboard polygon covered withcomplicated braiding, from which hung, at the end of a long thin cord,small twisted gold threads in the manner of a tassel. The cap was new;its peak shone.
“Rise,” said the master.
He stood up; his cap fell. The whole class began to laugh. He stooped topick it up. A neighbor knocked it down again with his elbow; he pickedit up once more.
“Get rid of your helmet,” said the master, who was a bit of a wag.
There was a burst of laughter from the boys, which so thoroughly put thepoor lad out of countenance that he did not know whether to keep his capin his hand, leave it on the ground, or put it on his head. He sat downagain and placed it on his knee.
“Rise,” repeated the master, “and tell me your name.”
The new boy articulated in a stammering voice an unintelligible name.
“Again!”
The same sputtering of syllables was heard, drowned by the tittering ofthe class.
“Louder!” cried the master; “louder!”
The “new fellow” then took a supreme resolution, opened an inordinatelylarge mouth, and shouted at the top of his voice as if calling someonein the word “Charbovari.”
A hubbub broke out, rose in crescendo with bursts of shrill voices (theyyelled, barked, stamped, repeated “Charbovari! Charbovari”), then diedaway into single notes, growing quieter only with great difficulty, andnow and again suddenly recommencing along the line of a form whence rosehere and there, like a damp cracker going off, a stifled laugh.
However, amid a rain of impositions, order was gradually re-establishedin the class; and the master having succeeded in catching the name of“Charles Bovary,” having had it dictated to him, spelt out, and re-read,at once ordered the poor devil to go and sit down on the punishment format the foot of the master’s desk. He got up, but before going hesitated.
“What are you looking for?” asked the master.
“My c-a-p,” timidly said the “new fellow,” casting troubled looks roundhim.
“Five hundred lines for all the class!” shouted in a furious voicestopped, like the _Quos ego_[1], a fresh outburst. “Silence!” continuedthe master indignantly, wiping his brow with his handkerchief, which hehad just taken from his cap. “As to you, ‘new boy,’ you will conjugate‘_ridiculus sum_’[2] twenty times.”
[1] A quotation from the Aeneid signifying a threat.
[2] I am ridiculous.
Then, in a gentler tone, “Come, you’ll find your cap again; it hasn’tbeen stolen.”
Quiet was restored. Heads bent over desks, and the “new fellow” remainedfor two hours in an exemplary attitude, although from time to time somepaper pellet flipped from the tip of a pen came bang in his face. But hewiped his face with one hand and continued motionless, his eyes lowered.
In the evening, at preparation, he pulled out his pens from his desk,arranged his small belongings, and carefully ruled his paper. We saw himworking conscientiously, looking up every word in the dictionary, andtaking the greatest pains. Thanks, no doubt, to the willingness heshowed, he had not to go down to the class below. But though he knew hisrules passably, he had little finish in composition. It was the cureof his village who had taught him his first Latin; his parents, frommotives of economy, having sent him to school as late as possible.
His father, Monsieur Charles Denis Bartolome Bovary, retiredassistant-surgeon-major, compromised about 1812 in certain conscriptionscandals, and forced at this time to leave the service, had takenadvantage of his fine figure to get hold of a dowry of sixty thousandfrancs that offered in the person of a hosier’s daughter who had fallenin love with his good looks. A fine man, a great talker, making hisspurs ring as he walked, wearing whiskers that ran into his moustache,his fingers always garnished with rings and dressed in loud colours,he had the dash of a military man with the easy go of a commercialtraveller.
Once married, he lived for three or four years on his wife’s fortune,dining well, rising late, smoking long porcelain pipes, not coming inat night till after the theatre, and haunting cafes. The father-in-lawdied, leaving little; he was indignant at this, “went in for thebusiness,” lost some money in it, then retired to the country, where hethought he would make money.
But, as he knew no more about farming than calico, as he rode his horsesinstead of sending them to plough, drank his cider in bottle instead ofselling it in cask, ate the finest poultry in his farmyard, and greasedhis hunting-boots with the fat of his pigs, he was not long in findingout that he would do better to give up all speculation.
For two hundred francs a year he managed to live on the border ofthe provinces of Caux and Picardy, in a kind of place half farm, halfprivate house; and here, soured, eaten up with regrets, cursing hisluck, jealous of everyone, he shut himself up at the age of forty-five,sick of men, he said, and determined to live at peace.
His wife had adored him once on a time; she had bored him with athousand servilities that had only estranged him the more. Lively once,expansive and affectionate, in growing older she had become (after thefashion of wine that, exposed to air, turns to vinegar) ill-tempered,grumbling, irritable. She had suffered so much without complaint atfirst, until she had seem him going after all the village drabs, anduntil a score of bad houses sent him back to her at night, weary,stinking drunk. Then her pride revolted. After that she was silent,burying her anger in a dumb stoicism that she maintained till her death.She was constantly going about looking after business matters. Shecalled on the lawyers, the president, remembered when bills fell due,got them renewed, and at home ironed, sewed, washed, looked after theworkmen, paid the accounts, while he, troubling himself about nothing,eternally besotted in sleepy sulkiness, whence he only roused himselfto say disagreeable things to her, sat smoking by the fire and spittinginto the cinders.
When she had a child, it had to be sent out to nurse. When he came home,the lad was spoilt as if he were a prince. His mother stuffed himwith jam; his father let him run about barefoot, and, playing thephilosopher, even said he might as well go about quite naked like theyoung of animals. As opposed to the maternal ideas, he had a certainvirile idea of childhood on which he sought to mould his son, wishinghim to be brought up hardily, like a Spartan, to give him a strongconstitution. He sent him to bed without any fire, taught him to drinkoff large draughts of rum and to jeer at religious processions. But,peaceable by nature, the lad answered only poorly to his notions. Hismother always kept him near her; she cut out cardboard for him, told himtales, entertained him with endless monologues full of melancholy gaietyand charming nonsense. In her life’s isolation she centered on thechild’s head all her shattered, broken little vanities. She dreamed ofhigh station; she already saw him, tall, handsome, clever, settled asan engineer or in the law. She taught him to read, and even, on an oldpiano, she had taught him two or three little songs. But to all thisMonsieur Bovary, caring little for letters, said, “It was not worthwhile. Would they ever have the means to send him to a public school, tobuy him a practice, or start him in business? Besides, with cheek a manalways gets on in the world.” Madame Bovary bit her lips, and the childknocked about the village.
He went after the labourers, drove away with clods of earth the ravensthat were flying about. He ate blackberries along the hedges, minded thegeese with a long switch, went haymaking during harvest, ran about inthe woods, played hop-scotch under the church porch on rainy days, andat great fetes begged the beadle to let him toll the bells, that hemight hang all his weight on the long rope and feel himself borne upwardby it in its swing. Meanwhile he grew like an oak; he was strong onhand, fresh of colour.
When he was twelve years old his mother had her own way; he beganlessons. The curé took him in hand; but the lessons were so short andirregular that they could not be of much use. They were given at sparemoments in the sacristy, standing up, hurriedly, between a baptism anda burial; or else the curé, if he had not to go out, sent for his pupilafter the _Angelus_[3]. They went up to his room and settled down; theflies and moths fluttered round the candle. It was close, the childfell asleep, and the good man, beginning to doze with his hands on hisstomach, was soon snoring with his mouth wide open. On other occasions,when Monsieur le Curé, on his way back after administering the viaticumto some sick person in the neighbourhood, caught sight of Charlesplaying about the fields, he called him, lectured him for a quarter ofan hour and took advantage of the occasion to make him conjugate hisverb at the foot of a tree. The rain interrupted them or anacquaintance passed. All the same he was always pleased with him, andeven said the “young man” had a very good memory.
[3] A devotion said at morning, noon, and evening, at the sound of abell. Here, the evening prayer.
Charles could not go on like this. Madame Bovary took strong steps.Ashamed, or rather tired out, Monsieur Bovary gave in without astruggle, and they waited one year longer, so that the lad should takehis first communion.
Six months more passed, and the year after Charles was finally sent toschool at Rouen, where his father took him towards the end of October,at the time of the St. Romain fair.
It would now be impossible for any of us to remember anything abouthim. He was a youth of even temperament, who played in playtime, workedin school-hours, was attentive in class, slept well in the dormitory,and ate well in the refectory. He had _in loco parentis_[4] a wholesaleironmonger in the Rue Ganterie, who took him out once a month onSundays after his shop was shut, sent him for a walk on the quay tolook at the boats, and then brought him back to college at seveno’clock before supper. Every Thursday evening he wrote a long letter tohis mother with red ink and three wafers; then he went over his historynote-books, or read an old volume of “Anarchasis” that was knockingabout the study. When he went for walks he talked to the servant, who,like himself, came from the country.
[4] In place of a parent.
By dint of hard work he kept always about the middle of the class; onceeven he got a certificate in natural history. But at the end of histhird year his parents withdrew him from the school to make him studymedicine, convinced that he could even take his degree by himself.
His mother chose a room for him on the fourth floor of a dyer’s sheknew, overlooking the Eau-de-Robec. She made arrangements for hisboard, got him furniture, table and two chairs, sent home for an oldcherry-tree bedstead, and bought besides a small cast-iron stove withthe supply of wood that was to warm the poor child.
Then at the end of a week she departed, after a thousand injunctions tobe good now that he was going to be left to himself.
The syllabus that he read on the notice-board stunned him; lectureson anatomy, lectures on pathology, lectures on physiology, lectures onpharmacy, lectures on botany and clinical medicine, and therapeutics,without counting hygiene and materia medica--all names of whoseetymologies he was ignorant, and that were to him as so many doors tosanctuaries filled with magnificent darkness.
He understood nothing of it all; it was all very well to listen--he didnot follow. Still he worked; he had bound note-books, he attended allthe courses, never missed a single lecture. He did his little daily tasklike a mill-horse, who goes round and round with his eyes bandaged, notknowing what work he is doing.
To spare him expense his mother sent him every week by the carrier apiece of veal baked in the oven, with which he lunched when he came backfrom the hospital, while he sat kicking his feet against the wall.After this he had to run off to lectures, to the operation-room, to thehospital, and return to his home at the other end of the town. In theevening, after the poor dinner of his landlord, he went back to hisroom and set to work again in his wet clothes, which smoked as he sat infront of the hot stove.
On the fine summer evenings, at the time when the close streets areempty, when the servants are playing shuttle-cock at the doors, heopened his window and leaned out. The river, that makes of this quarterof Rouen a wretched little Venice, flowed beneath him, between thebridges and the railings, yellow, violet, or blue. Working men, kneelingon the banks, washed their bare arms in the water. On poles projectingfrom the attics, skeins of cotton were drying in the air. Opposite,beyond the roots spread the pure heaven with the red sun setting. Howpleasant it must be at home! How fresh under the beech-tree! And heexpanded his nostrils to breathe in the sweet odours of the countrywhich did not reach him.
He grew thin, his figure became taller, his face took a saddened lookthat made it nearly interesting. Naturally, through indifference, heabandoned all the resolutions he had made. Once he missed a lecture; thenext day all the lectures; and, enjoying his idleness, little by little,he gave up work altogether. He got into the habit of going to thepublic-house, and had a passion for dominoes. To shut himself up everyevening in the dirty public room, to push about on marble tables thesmall sheep bones with black dots, seemed to him a fine proof of hisfreedom, which raised him in his own esteem. It was beginning to seelife, the sweetness of stolen pleasures; and when he entered, he puthis hand on the door-handle with a joy almost sensual. Then many thingshidden within him came out; he learnt couplets by heart and sang them tohis boon companions, became enthusiastic about Beranger, learnt how tomake punch, and, finally, how to make love.
Thanks to these preparatory labours, he failed completely in hisexamination for an ordinary degree. He was expected home the same nightto celebrate his success. He started on foot, stopped at the beginningof the village, sent for his mother, and told her all. She excusedhim, threw the blame of his failure on the injustice of the examiners,encouraged him a little, and took upon herself to set matters straight.It was only five years later that Monsieur Bovary knew the truth; it wasold then, and he accepted it. Moreover, he could not believe that a manborn of him could be a fool.
So Charles set to work again and crammed for his examination,ceaselessly learning all the old questions by heart. He passed prettywell. What a happy day for his mother! They gave a grand dinner.
Where should he go to practice? To Tostes, where there was only one olddoctor. For a long time Madame Bovary had been on the look-out for hisdeath, and the old fellow had barely been packed off when Charles wasinstalled, opposite his place, as his successor.
But it was not everything to have brought up a son, to have had himtaught medicine, and discovered Tostes, where he could practice it;he must have a wife. She found him one--the widow of a bailiff atDieppe--who was forty-five and had an income of twelve hundred francs.Though she was ugly, as dry as a bone, her face with as many pimples asthe spring has buds, Madame Dubuc had no lack of suitors. To attain herends Madame Bovary had to oust them all, and she even succeeded invery cleverly baffling the intrigues of a pork-butcher backed up by thepriests.
Charles had seen in marriage the advent of an easier life, thinking hewould be more free to do as he liked with himself and his money. But hiswife was master; he had to say this and not say that in company, to fastevery Friday, dress as she liked, harass at her bidding those patientswho did not pay. She opened his letter, watched his comings and goings,and listened at the partition-wall when women came to consult him in hissurgery.
She must have her chocolate every morning, attentions without end. Sheconstantly complained of her nerves, her chest, her liver. The noise offootsteps made her ill; when people left her, solitude became odious toher; if they came back, it was doubtless to see her die. When Charlesreturned in the evening, she stretched forth two long thin arms frombeneath the sheets, put them round his neck, and having made him sitdown on the edge of the bed, began to talk to him of her troubles: hewas neglecting her, he loved another. She had been warned she would beunhappy; and she ended by asking him for a dose of medicine and a littlemore love.
Chapter Two
One night towards eleven o’clock they were awakened by the noise ofa horse pulling up outside their door. The servant opened thegarret-window and parleyed for some time with a man in the street below.He came for the doctor, had a letter for him. Natasie came downstairsshivering and undid the bars and bolts one after the other. The man lefthis horse, and, following the servant, suddenly came in behind her. Hepulled out from his wool cap with grey top-knots a letter wrapped up ina rag and presented it gingerly to Charles, who rested on his elbow onthe pillow to read it. Natasie, standing near the bed, held the light.Madame in modesty had turned to the wall and showed only her back.
This letter, sealed with a small seal in blue wax, begged MonsieurBovary to come immediately to the farm of the Bertaux to set a brokenleg. Now from Tostes to the Bertaux was a good eighteen miles acrosscountry by way of Longueville and Saint-Victor. It was a dark night;Madame Bovary junior was afraid of accidents for her husband. So it wasdecided the stable-boy should go on first; Charles would start threehours later when the moon rose. A boy was to be sent to meet him, andshow him the way to the farm, and open the gates for him.
Towards four o’clock in the morning, Charles, well wrapped up in hiscloak, set out for the Bertaux. Still sleepy from the warmth of his bed,he let himself be lulled by the quiet trot of his horse. When it stoppedof its own accord in front of those holes surrounded with thorns thatare dug on the margin of furrows, Charles awoke with a start, suddenlyremembered the broken leg, and tried to call to mind all the fractureshe knew. The rain had stopped, day was breaking, and on the branchesof the leafless trees birds roosted motionless, their little feathersbristling in the cold morning wind. The flat country stretched as far aseye could see, and the tufts of trees round the farms at long intervalsseemed like dark violet stains on the cast grey surface, that on thehorizon faded into the gloom of the sky.
Charles from time to time opened his eyes, his mind grew weary, and,sleep coming upon him, he soon fell into a doze wherein, his recentsensations blending with memories, he became conscious of a doubleself, at once student and married man, lying in his bed as but now, andcrossing the operation theatre as of old. The warm smell of poulticesmingled in his brain with the fresh odour of dew; he heard the ironrings rattling along the curtain-rods of the bed and saw his wifesleeping. As he passed Vassonville he came upon a boy sitting on thegrass at the edge of a ditch.
“Are you the doctor?” asked the child.
And on Charles’s answer he took his wooden shoes in his hands and ran onin front of him.
The general practitioner, riding along, gathered from his guide’s talkthat Monsieur Rouault must be one of the well-to-do farmers.
He had broken his leg the evening before on his way home from aTwelfth-night feast at a neighbour’s. His wife had been dead for twoyears. There was with him only his daughter, who helped him to keephouse.
The ruts were becoming deeper; they were approaching the Bertaux.
The little lad, slipping through a hole in the hedge, disappeared;then he came back to the end of a courtyard to open the gate. Thehorse slipped on the wet grass; Charles had to stoop to pass underthe branches. The watchdogs in their kennels barked, dragging at theirchains. As he entered the Bertaux, the horse took fright and stumbled.
It was a substantial-looking farm. In the stables, over the top of theopen doors, one could see great cart-horses quietly feeding from newracks. Right along the outbuildings extended a large dunghill, fromwhich manure liquid oozed, while amidst fowls and turkeys, five or sixpeacocks, a luxury in Chauchois farmyards, were foraging on the top ofit. The sheepfold was long, the barn high, with walls smooth as yourhand. Under the cart-shed were two large carts and four ploughs, withtheir whips, shafts and harnesses complete, whose fleeces of blue woolwere getting soiled by the fine dust that fell from the granaries. Thecourtyard sloped upwards, planted with trees set out symmetrically, andthe chattering noise of a flock of geese was heard near the pond.
A young woman in a blue merino dress with three flounces came to thethreshold of the door to receive Monsieur Bovary, whom she led to thekitchen, where a large fire was blazing. The servant’s breakfast wasboiling beside it in small pots of all sizes. Some damp clothes weredrying inside the chimney-corner. The shovel, tongs, and the nozzleof the bellows, all of colossal size, shone like polished steel, whilealong the walls hung many pots and pans in which the clear flame of thehearth, mingling with the first rays of the sun coming in through thewindow, was mirrored fitfully.
Charles went up the first floor to see the patient. He found him in hisbed, sweating under his bed-clothes, having thrown his cotton nightcapright away from him. He was a fat little man of fifty, with white skinand blue eyes, the forepart of his head bald, and he wore earrings. Byhis side on a chair stood a large decanter of brandy, whence he pouredhimself a little from time to time to keep up his spirits; but as soonas he caught sight of the doctor his elation subsided, and instead ofswearing, as he had been doing for the last twelve hours, began to groanfreely.
The fracture was a simple one, without any kind of complication.
Charles could not have hoped for an easier case. Then calling to mindthe devices of his masters at the bedsides of patients, he comforted thesufferer with all sorts of kindly remarks, those caresses of the surgeonthat are like the oil they put on bistouries. In order to make somesplints a bundle of laths was brought up from the cart-house. Charlesselected one, cut it into two pieces and planed it with a fragmentof windowpane, while the servant tore up sheets to make bandages, andMademoiselle Emma tried to sew some pads. As she was a long time beforeshe found her work-case, her father grew impatient; she did not answer,but as she sewed she pricked her fingers, which she then put to hermouth to suck them. Charles was surprised at the whiteness of her nails.They were shiny, delicate at the tips, more polished than the ivory ofDieppe, and almond-shaped. Yet her hand was not beautiful, perhaps notwhite enough, and a little hard at the knuckles; besides, it was toolong, with no soft inflections in the outlines. Her real beauty was inher eyes. Although brown, they seemed black because of the lashes, andher look came at you frankly, with a candid boldness.
The bandaging over, the doctor was invited by Monsieur Rouault himselfto “pick a bit” before he left.
Charles went down into the room on the ground floor. Knives and forksand silver goblets were laid for two on a little table at the foot of ahuge bed that had a canopy of printed cotton with figures representingTurks. There was an odour of iris-root and damp sheets that escapedfrom a large oak chest opposite the window. On the floor in corners weresacks of flour stuck upright in rows. These were the overflow fromthe neighbouring granary, to which three stone steps led. By way ofdecoration for the apartment, hanging to a nail in the middle of thewall, whose green paint scaled off from the effects of the saltpetre,was a crayon head of Minerva in gold frame, underneath which was writtenin Gothic letters “To dear Papa.”
First they spoke of the patient, then of the weather, of the great cold,of the wolves that infested the fields at night.
Mademoiselle Rouault did not at all like the country, especially nowthat she had to look after the farm almost alone. As the room waschilly, she shivered as she ate. This showed something of her full lips,that she had a habit of biting when silent.
Her neck stood out from a white turned-down collar. Her hair, whosetwo black folds seemed each of a single piece, so smooth were they, wasparted in the middle by a delicate line that curved slightly with thecurve of the head; and, just showing the tip of the ear, it was joinedbehind in a thick chignon, with a wavy movement at the temples that thecountry doctor saw now for the first time in his life. The upper part ofher cheek was rose-coloured. She had, like a man, thrust in between twobuttons of her bodice a tortoise-shell eyeglass.
When Charles, after bidding farewell to old Rouault, returned to theroom before leaving, he found her standing, her forehead against thewindow, looking into the garden, where the bean props had been knockeddown by the wind. She turned round. “Are you looking for anything?” sheasked.
“My whip, if you please,” he answered.
He began rummaging on the bed, behind the doors, under the chairs. Ithad fallen to the floor, between the sacks and the wall. MademoiselleEmma saw it, and bent over the flour sacks.
Charles out of politeness made a dash also, and as he stretched out hisarm, at the same moment felt his breast brush against the back of theyoung girl bending beneath him. She drew herself up, scarlet, and lookedat him over her shoulder as she handed him his whip.
Instead of returning to the Bertaux in three days as he had promised,he went back the very next day, then regularly twice a week, withoutcounting the visits he paid now and then as if by accident.
Everything, moreover, went well; the patient progressed favourably; andwhen, at the end of forty-six days, old Rouault was seen trying to walkalone in his “den,” Monsieur Bovary began to be looked upon as a manof great capacity. Old Rouault said that he could not have been curedbetter by the first doctor of Yvetot, or even of Rouen.
As to Charles, he did not stop to ask himself why it was a pleasureto him to go to the Bertaux. Had he done so, he would, no doubt, haveattributed his zeal to the importance of the case, or perhaps to themoney he hoped to make by it. Was it for this, however, that his visitsto the farm formed a delightful exception to the meagre occupations ofhis life? On these days he rose early, set off at a gallop, urging onhis horse, then got down to wipe his boots in the grass and put on blackgloves before entering. He liked going into the courtyard, and noticingthe gate turn against his shoulder, the cock crow on the wall, the ladsrun to meet him. He liked the granary and the stables; he liked oldRouault, who pressed his hand and called him his saviour; he liked thesmall wooden shoes of Mademoiselle Emma on the scoured flags of thekitchen--her high heels made her a little taller; and when she walked infront of him, the wooden soles springing up quickly struck with a sharpsound against the leather of her boots.
She always accompanied him to the first step of the stairs. When hishorse had not yet been brought round she stayed there. They had said“Good-bye”; there was no more talking. The open air wrapped her round,playing with the soft down on the back of her neck, or blew to and froon her hips the apron-strings, that fluttered like streamers. Once,during a thaw the bark of the trees in the yard was oozing, the snow onthe roofs of the outbuildings was melting; she stood on the threshold,and went to fetch her sunshade and opened it. The sunshade of silk ofthe colour of pigeons’ breasts, through which the sun shone, lightedup with shifting hues the white skin of her face. She smiled under thetender warmth, and drops of water could be heard falling one by one onthe stretched silk.
During the first period of Charles’s visits to the Bertaux, MadameBovary junior never failed to inquire after the invalid, and she hadeven chosen in the book that she kept on a system of double entry aclean blank page for Monsieur Rouault. But when she heard he had adaughter, she began to make inquiries, and she learnt the MademoiselleRouault, brought up at the Ursuline Convent, had received what is called“a good education”; and so knew dancing, geography, drawing, how toembroider and play the piano. That was the last straw.
“So it is for this,” she said to herself, “that his face beams when hegoes to see her, and that he puts on his new waistcoat at the risk ofspoiling it with the rain. Ah! that woman! That woman!”
And she detested her instinctively. At first she solaced herself byallusions that Charles did not understand, then by casual observationsthat he let pass for fear of a storm, finally by open apostrophes towhich he knew not what to answer. “Why did he go back to the Bertaux nowthat Monsieur Rouault was cured and that these folks hadn’t paid yet?Ah! it was because a young lady was there, some one who know how totalk, to embroider, to be witty. That was what he cared about; he wantedtown misses.” And she went on--
“The daughter of old Rouault a town miss! Get out! Their grandfather wasa shepherd, and they have a cousin who was almost had up at the assizesfor a nasty blow in a quarrel. It is not worth while making such a fuss,or showing herself at church on Sundays in a silk gown like a countess.Besides, the poor old chap, if it hadn’t been for the colza last year,would have had much ado to pay up his arrears.”
For very weariness Charles left off going to the Bertaux. Heloise madehim swear, his hand on the prayer-book, that he would go there no moreafter much sobbing and many kisses, in a great outburst of love. Heobeyed then, but the strength of his desire protested against theservility of his conduct; and he thought, with a kind of naivehypocrisy, that his interdict to see her gave him a sort of right tolove her. And then the widow was thin; she had long teeth; wore in allweathers a little black shawl, the edge of which hung down between hershoulder-blades; her bony figure was sheathed in her clothes as if theywere a scabbard; they were too short, and displayed her ankles with thelaces of her large boots crossed over grey stockings.
Charles’s mother came to see them from time to time, but after a fewdays the daughter-in-law seemed to put her own edge on her, andthen, like two knives, they scarified him with their reflections andobservations. It was wrong of him to eat so much.
Why did he always offer a glass of something to everyone who came?What obstinacy not to wear flannels! In the spring it came about that anotary at Ingouville, the holder of the widow Dubuc’s property, one fineday went off, taking with him all the money in his office. Heloise,it is true, still possessed, besides a share in a boat valued at sixthousand francs, her house in the Rue St. Francois; and yet, with allthis fortune that had been so trumpeted abroad, nothing, exceptingperhaps a little furniture and a few clothes, had appeared in thehousehold. The matter had to be gone into. The house at Dieppe was foundto be eaten up with mortgages to its foundations; what she had placedwith the notary God only knew, and her share in the boat did not exceedone thousand crowns. She had lied, the good lady! In his exasperation,Monsieur Bovary the elder, smashing a chair on the flags, accused hiswife of having caused misfortune to the son by harnessing him to sucha harridan, whose harness wasn’t worth her hide. They came to Tostes.Explanations followed. There were scenes. Heloise in tears, throwing herarms about her husband, implored him to defend her from his parents.
Charles tried to speak up for her. They grew angry and left the house.
But “the blow had struck home.” A week after, as she was hanging up somewashing in her yard, she was seized with a spitting of blood, andthe next day, while Charles had his back turned to her drawing thewindow-curtain, she said, “O God!” gave a sigh and fainted. She wasdead! What a surprise! When all was over at the cemetery Charles wenthome. He found no one downstairs; he went up to the first floor totheir room; saw her dress still hanging at the foot of the alcove; then,leaning against the writing-table, he stayed until the evening, buriedin a sorrowful reverie. She had loved him after all!
Chapter Three
One morning old Rouault brought Charles the money for setting hisleg--seventy-five francs in forty-sou pieces, and a turkey. He had heardof his loss, and consoled him as well as he could.
“I know what it is,” said he, clapping him on the shoulder; “I’ve beenthrough it. When I lost my dear departed, I went into the fields to bequite alone. I fell at the foot of a tree; I cried; I called on God; Italked nonsense to Him. I wanted to be like the moles that I saw on thebranches, their insides swarming with worms, dead, and an end of it.And when I thought that there were others at that very moment with theirnice little wives holding them in their embrace, I struck great blows onthe earth with my stick. I was pretty well mad with not eating; the veryidea of going to a cafe disgusted me--you wouldn’t believe it. Well,quite softly, one day following another, a spring on a winter, and anautumn after a summer, this wore away, piece by piece, crumb by crumb;it passed away, it is gone, I should say it has sunk; for somethingalways remains at the bottom as one would say--a weight here, at one’sheart. But since it is the lot of all of us, one must not give wayaltogether, and, because others have died, want to die too. You mustpull yourself together, Monsieur Bovary. It will pass away. Come to seeus; my daughter thinks of you now and again, d’ye know, and she saysyou are forgetting her. Spring will soon be here. We’ll have somerabbit-shooting in the warrens to amuse you a bit.”
Charles followed his advice. He went back to the Bertaux. He found allas he had left it, that is to say, as it was five months ago. The peartrees were already in blossom, and Farmer Rouault, on his legs again,came and went, making the farm more full of life.
Thinking it his duty to heap the greatest attention upon the doctorbecause of his sad position, he begged him not to take his hat off,spoke to him in an undertone as if he had been ill, and even pretendedto be angry because nothing rather lighter had been prepared for himthan for the others, such as a little clotted cream or stewed pears. Hetold stories. Charles found himself laughing, but the remembrance of hiswife suddenly coming back to him depressed him. Coffee was brought in;he thought no more about her.
He thought less of her as he grew accustomed to living alone. The newdelight of independence soon made his loneliness bearable. He could nowchange his meal-times, go in or out without explanation, and when he wasvery tired stretch himself at full length on his bed. So he nursed andcoddled himself and accepted the consolations that were offered him.On the other hand, the death of his wife had not served him ill in hisbusiness, since for a month people had been saying, “The poor youngman! what a loss!” His name had been talked about, his practice hadincreased; and moreover, he could go to the Bertaux just as he liked.He had an aimless hope, and was vaguely happy; he thought himself betterlooking as he brushed his whiskers before the looking-glass.
One day he got there about three o’clock. Everybody was in the fields.He went into the kitchen, but did not at once catch sight of Emma; theoutside shutters were closed. Through the chinks of the wood the sunsent across the flooring long fine rays that were broken at the cornersof the furniture and trembled along the ceiling. Some flies on the tablewere crawling up the glasses that had been used, and buzzing as theydrowned themselves in the dregs of the cider. The daylight that came inby the chimney made velvet of the soot at the back of the fireplace, andtouched with blue the cold cinders. Between the window and the hearthEmma was sewing; she wore no fichu; he could see small drops ofperspiration on her bare shoulders.
After the fashion of country folks she asked him to have something todrink. He said no; she insisted, and at last laughingly offered to havea glass of liqueur with him. So she went to fetch a bottle of curacaofrom the cupboard, reached down two small glasses, filled one to thebrim, poured scarcely anything into the other, and, after having clinkedglasses, carried hers to her mouth. As it was almost empty she bentback to drink, her head thrown back, her lips pouting, her neck on thestrain. She laughed at getting none of it, while with the tip of hertongue passing between her small teeth she licked drop by drop thebottom of her glass.
She sat down again and took up her work, a white cotton stocking she wasdarning. She worked with her head bent down; she did not speak, nor didCharles. The air coming in under the door blew a little dust over theflags; he watched it drift along, and heard nothing but the throbbingin his head and the faint clucking of a hen that had laid an egg in theyard. Emma from time to time cooled her cheeks with the palms of herhands, and cooled these again on the knobs of the huge fire-dogs.
She complained of suffering since the beginning of the season fromgiddiness; she asked if sea-baths would do her any good; she begantalking of her convent, Charles of his school; words came to them. Theywent up into her bedroom. She showed him her old music-books, the littleprizes she had won, and the oak-leaf crowns, left at the bottom of acupboard. She spoke to him, too, of her mother, of the country, and evenshowed him the bed in the garden where, on the first Friday of everymonth, she gathered flowers to put on her mother’s tomb. But thegardener they had never knew anything about it; servants are so stupid!She would have dearly liked, if only for the winter, to live in town,although the length of the fine days made the country perhaps even morewearisome in the summer. And, according to what she was saying, hervoice was clear, sharp, or, on a sudden all languor, drawn out inmodulations that ended almost in murmurs as she spoke to herself, nowjoyous, opening big naive eyes, then with her eyelids half closed, herlook full of boredom, her thoughts wandering.
Going home at night, Charles went over her words one by one, trying torecall them, to fill out their sense, that he might piece out the lifeshe had lived before he knew her. But he never saw her in his thoughtsother than he had seen her the first time, or as he had just left her.Then he asked himself what would become of her--if she would be married,and to whom! Alas! Old Rouault was rich, and she!--so beautiful! ButEmma’s face always rose before his eyes, and a monotone, like thehumming of a top, sounded in his ears, “If you should marry afterall! If you should marry!” At night he could not sleep; his throat wasparched; he was athirst. He got up to drink from the water-bottle andopened the window. The night was covered with stars, a warm wind blowingin the distance; the dogs were barking. He turned his head towards theBertaux.
Thinking that, after all, he should lose nothing, Charles promisedhimself to ask her in marriage as soon as occasion offered, but eachtime such occasion did offer the fear of not finding the right wordssealed his lips.
Old Rouault would not have been sorry to be rid of his daughter, whowas of no use to him in the house. In his heart he excused her,thinking her too clever for farming, a calling under the ban of Heaven,since one never saw a millionaire in it. Far from having made a fortuneby it, the good man was losing every year; for if he was good inbargaining, in which he enjoyed the dodges of the trade, on the otherhand, agriculture properly so called, and the internal management ofthe farm, suited him less than most people. He did not willingly takehis hands out of his pockets, and did not spare expense in all thatconcerned himself, liking to eat well, to have good fires, and to sleepwell. He liked old cider, underdone legs of mutton, _glorias_[5] wellbeaten up. He took his meals in the kitchen alone, opposite the fire,on a little table brought to him all ready laid as on the stage.
[5] A mixture of coffee and spirits.
When, therefore, he perceived that Charles’s cheeks grew red if near hisdaughter, which meant that he would propose for her one of these days,he chewed the cud of the matter beforehand. He certainly thought him alittle meagre, and not quite the son-in-law he would have liked, but hewas said to be well brought-up, economical, very learned, and no doubtwould not make too many difficulties about the dowry. Now, as oldRouault would soon be forced to sell twenty-two acres of “his property,” as he owed a good deal to the mason, to the harness-maker, and as theshaft of the cider-press wanted renewing, “If he asks for her,” he saidto himself, “I’ll give her to him.”
At Michaelmas Charles went to spend three days at the Bertaux.
The last had passed like the others in procrastinating from hour tohour. Old Rouault was seeing him off; they were walking along the roadfull of ruts; they were about to part. This was the time. Charles gavehimself as far as to the corner of the hedge, and at last, when pastit--
“Monsieur Rouault,” he murmured, “I should like to say something toyou.”
They stopped. Charles was silent.
“Well, tell me your story. Don’t I know all about it?” said old Rouault,laughing softly.
“Monsieur Rouault--Monsieur Rouault,” stammered Charles.
“I ask nothing better”, the farmer went on. “Although, no doubt, thelittle one is of my mind, still we must ask her opinion. So you getoff--I’ll go back home. If it is ‘yes’, you needn’t return because ofall the people about, and besides it would upset her too much. But sothat you mayn’t be eating your heart, I’ll open wide the outer shutterof the window against the wall; you can see it from the back by leaningover the hedge.”
And he went off.
Charles fastened his horse to a tree; he ran into the road and waited.Half an hour passed, then he counted nineteen minutes by his watch.Suddenly a noise was heard against the wall; the shutter had been thrownback; the hook was still swinging.
The next day by nine o’clock he was at the farm. Emma blushed ashe entered, and she gave a little forced laugh to keep herself incountenance. Old Rouault embraced his future son-in-law. The discussionof money matters was put off; moreover, there was plenty of time beforethem, as the marriage could not decently take place till Charles was outof mourning, that is to say, about the spring of the next year.
The winter passed waiting for this. Mademoiselle Rouault was busy withher trousseau. Part of it was ordered at Rouen, and she made herselfchemises and nightcaps after fashion-plates that she borrowed. WhenCharles visited the farmer, the preparations for the wedding were talkedover; they wondered in what room they should have dinner; they dreamedof the number of dishes that would be wanted, and what should beentrees.
Emma would, on the contrary, have preferred to have a midnight weddingwith torches, but old Rouault could not understand such an idea. Sothere was a wedding at which forty-three persons were present, at whichthey remained sixteen hours at table, began again the next day, and tosome extent on the days following.
Chapter Four
The guests arrived early in carriages, in one-horse chaises, two-wheeledcars, old open gigs, waggonettes with leather hoods, and the youngpeople from the nearer villages in carts, in which they stood up inrows, holding on to the sides so as not to fall, going at a trotand well shaken up. Some came from a distance of thirty miles, fromGoderville, from Normanville, and from Cany.
All the relatives of both families had been invited, quarrels betweenfriends arranged, acquaintances long since lost sight of written to.
From time to time one heard the crack of a whip behind the hedge; thenthe gates opened, a chaise entered. Galloping up to the foot of thesteps, it stopped short and emptied its load. They got down from allsides, rubbing knees and stretching arms. The ladies, wearing bonnets,had on dresses in the town fashion, gold watch chains, pelerines withthe ends tucked into belts, or little coloured fichus fastened downbehind with a pin, and that left the back of the neck bare. The lads,dressed like their papas, seemed uncomfortable in their new clothes(many that day hand-sewed their first pair of boots), and by theirsides, speaking never a work, wearing the white dress of their firstcommunion lengthened for the occasion were some big girls of fourteen orsixteen, cousins or elder sisters no doubt, rubicund, bewildered, theirhair greasy with rose pomade, and very much afraid of dirtying theirgloves. As there were not enough stable-boys to unharness all thecarriages, the gentlemen turned up their sleeves and set about itthemselves. According to their different social positions they woretail-coats, overcoats, shooting jackets, cutaway-coats; fine tail-coats,redolent of family respectability, that only came out of the wardrobeon state occasions; overcoats with long tails flapping in the wind andround capes and pockets like sacks; shooting jackets of coarsecloth, generally worn with a cap with a brass-bound peak; very shortcutaway-coats with two small buttons in the back, close together likea pair of eyes, and the tails of which seemed cut out of one piece by acarpenter’s hatchet. Some, too (but these, you may be sure, would sit atthe bottom of the table), wore their best blouses--that is to say,with collars turned down to the shoulders, the back gathered into smallplaits and the waist fastened very low down with a worked belt.
And the shirts stood out from the chests like cuirasses! Everyone hadjust had his hair cut; ears stood out from the heads; they had beenclose-shaved; a few, even, who had had to get up before daybreak, andnot been able to see to shave, had diagonal gashes under their noses orcuts the size of a three-franc piece along the jaws, which the freshair en route had enflamed, so that the great white beaming faces weremottled here and there with red dabs.
The mairie was a mile and a half from the farm, and they went thitheron foot, returning in the same way after the ceremony in the church.The procession, first united like one long coloured scarf that undulatedacross the fields, along the narrow path winding amid the green corn,soon lengthened out, and broke up into different groups that loitered totalk. The fiddler walked in front with his violin, gay with ribbons atits pegs. Then came the married pair, the relations, the friends, allfollowing pell-mell; the children stayed behind amusing themselvesplucking the bell-flowers from oat-ears, or playing amongst themselvesunseen. Emma’s dress, too long, trailed a little on the ground; fromtime to time she stopped to pull it up, and then delicately, with hergloved hands, she picked off the coarse grass and the thistledowns,while Charles, empty handed, waited till she had finished. Old Rouault,with a new silk hat and the cuffs of his black coat covering his handsup to the nails, gave his arm to Madame Bovary senior. As to MonsieurBovary senior, who, heartily despising all these folk, had come simplyin a frock-coat of military cut with one row of buttons--he was passingcompliments of the bar to a fair young peasant. She bowed, blushed,and did not know what to say. The other wedding guests talked of theirbusiness or played tricks behind each other’s backs, egging one anotheron in advance to be jolly. Those who listened could always catch thesqueaking of the fiddler, who went on playing across the fields. Whenhe saw that the rest were far behind he stopped to take breath, slowlyrosined his bow, so that the strings should sound more shrilly, then setoff again, by turns lowering and raising his neck, the better to marktime for himself. The noise of the instrument drove away the littlebirds from afar.
The table was laid under the cart-shed. On it were four sirloins, sixchicken fricassees, stewed veal, three legs of mutton, and in the middlea fine roast suckling pig, flanked by four chitterlings with sorrel. Atthe corners were decanters of brandy. Sweet bottled-cider frothed roundthe corks, and all the glasses had been filled to the brim with winebeforehand. Large dishes of yellow cream, that trembled with the leastshake of the table, had designed on their smooth surface the initials ofthe newly wedded pair in nonpareil arabesques. A confectioner of Yvetothad been intrusted with the tarts and sweets. As he had only just set upon the place, he had taken a lot of trouble, and at dessert he himselfbrought in a set dish that evoked loud cries of wonderment. To beginwith, at its base there was a square of blue cardboard, representing atemple with porticoes, colonnades, and stucco statuettes all round, andin the niches constellations of gilt paper stars; then on the secondstage was a dungeon of Savoy cake, surrounded by many fortificationsin candied angelica, almonds, raisins, and quarters of oranges; andfinally, on the upper platform a green field with rocks set in lakes ofjam, nutshell boats, and a small Cupid balancing himself in a chocolateswing whose two uprights ended in real roses for balls at the top.
Until night they ate. When any of them were too tired of sitting, theywent out for a stroll in the yard, or for a game with corks in thegranary, and then returned to table. Some towards the finish went tosleep and snored. But with the coffee everyone woke up. Then they begansongs, showed off tricks, raised heavy weights, performed feats withtheir fingers, then tried lifting carts on their shoulders, made broadjokes, kissed the women. At night when they left, the horses, stuffedup to the nostrils with oats, could hardly be got into the shafts; theykicked, reared, the harness broke, their masters laughed or swore;and all night in the light of the moon along country roads there wererunaway carts at full gallop plunging into the ditches, jumping overyard after yard of stones, clambering up the hills, with women leaningout from the tilt to catch hold of the reins.
Those who stayed at the Bertaux spent the night drinking in the kitchen.The children had fallen asleep under the seats.
The bride had begged her father to be spared the usual marriagepleasantries. However, a fishmonger, one of their cousins (who had evenbrought a pair of soles for his wedding present), began to squirt waterfrom his mouth through the keyhole, when old Rouault came up just intime to stop him, and explain to him that the distinguished positionof his son-in-law would not allow of such liberties. The cousin all thesame did not give in to these reasons readily. In his heart he accusedold Rouault of being proud, and he joined four or five other guests ina corner, who having, through mere chance, been several times runningserved with the worst helps of meat, also were of opinion they had beenbadly used, and were whispering about their host, and with covered hintshoping he would ruin himself.
Madame Bovary, senior, had not opened her mouth all day. She had beenconsulted neither as to the dress of her daughter-in-law nor as to thearrangement of the feast; she went to bed early. Her husband, insteadof following her, sent to Saint-Victor for some cigars, and smoked tilldaybreak, drinking kirsch-punch, a mixture unknown to the company. Thisadded greatly to the consideration in which he was held.
Charles, who was not of a facetious turn, did not shine at the wedding.He answered feebly to the puns, _doubles entendres_,[6] compliments,and chaff that it was felt a duty to let off at him as soon as the soupappeared.
[6] Double meanings.
The next day, on the other hand, he seemed another man. It was he whomight rather have been taken for the virgin of the evening before,whilst the bride gave no sign that revealed anything. The shrewdest didnot know what to make of it, and they looked at her when she passednear them with an unbounded concentration of mind. But Charlesconcealed nothing. He called her “my wife”, _tutoyéd_[7] her, asked forher of everyone, looked for her everywhere, and often he dragged herinto the yards, where he could be seen from far between the trees,putting his arm around her waist, and walking half-bending over her,ruffling the chemisette of her bodice with his head.
[7] Used the familiar form of address.
Two days after the wedding the married pair left. Charles, on account ofhis patients, could not be away longer. Old Rouault had them driven backin his cart, and himself accompanied them as far as Vassonville. Herehe embraced his daughter for the last time, got down, and went his way.When he had gone about a hundred paces he stopped, and as he saw thecart disappearing, its wheels turning in the dust, he gave a deep sigh.Then he remembered his wedding, the old times, the first pregnancy ofhis wife; he, too, had been very happy the day when he had taken herfrom her father to his home, and had carried her off on a pillion,trotting through the snow, for it was near Christmas-time, and thecountry was all white. She held him by one arm, her basket hanging fromthe other; the wind blew the long lace of her Cauchois headdress so thatit sometimes flapped across his mouth, and when he turned his head hesaw near him, on his shoulder, her little rosy face, smiling silentlyunder the gold bands of her cap. To warm her hands she put them fromtime to time in his breast. How long ago it all was! Their son wouldhave been thirty by now. Then he looked back and saw nothing on theroad. He felt dreary as an empty house; and tender memories minglingwith the sad thoughts in his brain, addled by the fumes of the feast, hefelt inclined for a moment to take a turn towards the church. As he wasafraid, however, that this sight would make him yet more sad, he wentright away home.
Monsieur and Madame Charles arrived at Tostes about six o’clock.
The neighbors came to the windows to see their doctor’s new wife.
The old servant presented herself, curtsied to her, apologised for nothaving dinner ready, and suggested that madame, in the meantime, shouldlook over her house.
Chapter Five
The brick front was just in a line with the street, or rather the road.Behind the door hung a cloak with a small collar, a bridle, and a blackleather cap, and on the floor, in a corner, were a pair of leggings,still covered with dry mud. On the right was the one apartment, that wasboth dining and sitting room. A canary yellow paper, relieved at thetop by a garland of pale flowers, was puckered everywhere over the badlystretched canvas; white calico curtains with a red border hung crosswaysat the length of the window; and on the narrow mantelpiece a clock witha head of Hippocrates shone resplendent between two plate candlesticksunder oval shades. On the other side of the passage was Charles’sconsulting room, a little room about six paces wide, with a table,three chairs, and an office chair. Volumes of the “Dictionary of MedicalScience,” uncut, but the binding rather the worse for the successivesales through which they had gone, occupied almost along the six shelvesof a deal bookcase.
The smell of melted butter penetrated through the walls when he sawpatients, just as in the kitchen one could hear the people coughing inthe consulting room and recounting their histories.
Then, opening on the yard, where the stable was, came a largedilapidated room with a stove, now used as a wood-house, cellar, andpantry, full of old rubbish, of empty casks, agricultural implementspast service, and a mass of dusty things whose use it was impossible toguess.
The garden, longer than wide, ran between two mud walls with espalieredapricots, to a hawthorn hedge that separated it from the field. In themiddle was a slate sundial on a brick pedestal; four flower beds witheglantines surrounded symmetrically the more useful kitchen garden bed.Right at the bottom, under the spruce bushes, was a cure in plasterreading his breviary.
Emma went upstairs. The first room was not furnished, but in the second,which was their bedroom, was a mahogany bedstead in an alcove with reddrapery. A shell box adorned the chest of drawers, and on the secretarynear the window a bouquet of orange blossoms tied with white satinribbons stood in a bottle. It was a bride’s bouquet; it was the otherone’s. She looked at it. Charles noticed it; he took it and carried itup to the attic, while Emma seated in an arm-chair (they were puttingher things down around her) thought of her bridal flowers packed up ina bandbox, and wondered, dreaming, what would be done with them if shewere to die.
During the first days she occupied herself in thinking about changes inthe house. She took the shades off the candlesticks, had new wallpaperput up, the staircase repainted, and seats made in the garden round thesundial; she even inquired how she could get a basin with a jet fountainand fishes. Finally her husband, knowing that she liked to drive out,picked up a second-hand dogcart, which, with new lamps and splashboardin striped leather, looked almost like a tilbury.
He was happy then, and without a care in the world. A meal together,a walk in the evening on the highroad, a gesture of her hands over herhair, the sight of her straw hat hanging from the window-fastener, andmany another thing in which Charles had never dreamed of pleasure, nowmade up the endless round of his happiness. In bed, in the morning, byher side, on the pillow, he watched the sunlight sinking into the downon her fair cheek, half hidden by the lappets of her night-cap. Seenthus closely, her eyes looked to him enlarged, especially when, onwaking up, she opened and shut them rapidly many times. Black in theshade, dark blue in broad daylight, they had, as it were, depths ofdifferent colours, that, darker in the centre, grew paler towards thesurface of the eye. His own eyes lost themselves in these depths; he sawhimself in miniature down to the shoulders, with his handkerchief roundhis head and the top of his shirt open. He rose. She came to the windowto see him off, and stayed leaning on the sill between two pots ofgeranium, clad in her dressing gown hanging loosely about her. Charles,in the street buckled his spurs, his foot on the mounting stone, whileshe talked to him from above, picking with her mouth some scrap offlower or leaf that she blew out at him. Then this, eddying, floating,described semicircles in the air like a bird, and was caught beforeit reached the ground in the ill-groomed mane of the old white marestanding motionless at the door. Charles from horseback threw her akiss; she answered with a nod; she shut the window, and he set off. Andthen along the highroad, spreading out its long ribbon of dust, alongthe deep lanes that the trees bent over as in arbours, along paths wherethe corn reached to the knees, with the sun on his back and the morningair in his nostrils, his heart full of the joys of the past night, hismind at rest, his flesh at ease, he went on, re-chewing his happiness,like those who after dinner taste again the truffles which they aredigesting.
Until now what good had he had of his life? His time at school, whenhe remained shut up within the high walls, alone, in the midst ofcompanions richer than he or cleverer at their work, who laughed at hisaccent, who jeered at his clothes, and whose mothers came to the schoolwith cakes in their muffs? Later on, when he studied medicine, and neverhad his purse full enough to treat some little work-girl who would havebecome his mistress? Afterwards, he had lived fourteen months with thewidow, whose feet in bed were cold as icicles. But now he had for lifethis beautiful woman whom he adored. For him the universe did not extendbeyond the circumference of her petticoat, and he reproached himselfwith not loving her. He wanted to see her again; he turned back quickly,ran up the stairs with a beating heart. Emma, in her room, was dressing;he came up on tiptoe, kissed her back; she gave a cry.
He could not keep from constantly touching her comb, her ring, herfichu; sometimes he gave her great sounding kisses with all his mouth onher cheeks, or else little kisses in a row all along her bare armfrom the tip of her fingers up to her shoulder, and she put him awayhalf-smiling, half-vexed, as you do a child who hangs about you.
Before marriage she thought herself in love; but the happiness thatshould have followed this love not having come, she must, she thought,have been mistaken. And Emma tried to find out what one meant exactly inlife by the words felicity, passion, rapture, that had seemed to her sobeautiful in books.
Chapter Six
She had read “Paul and Virginia,” and she had dreamed of the littlebamboo-house, the nigger Domingo, the dog Fidele, but above all of thesweet friendship of some dear little brother, who seeks red fruit foryou on trees taller than steeples, or who runs barefoot over the sand,bringing you a bird’s nest.
When she was thirteen, her father himself took her to town to placeher in the convent. They stopped at an inn in the St. Gervais quarter,where, at their supper, they used painted plates that set forth thestory of Mademoiselle de la Valliere. The explanatory legends, chippedhere and there by the scratching of knives, all glorified religion, thetendernesses of the heart, and the pomps of court.
Far from being bored at first at the convent, she took pleasure in thesociety of the good sisters, who, to amuse her, took her to the chapel,which one entered from the refectory by a long corridor. She played verylittle during recreation hours, knew her catechism well, and it was shewho always answered Monsieur le Vicaire’s difficult questions. Livingthus, without ever leaving the warm atmosphere of the classrooms, andamid these pale-faced women wearing rosaries with brass crosses, shewas softly lulled by the mystic languor exhaled in the perfumes of thealtar, the freshness of the holy water, and the lights of the tapers.Instead of attending to mass, she looked at the pious vignettes withtheir azure borders in her book, and she loved the sick lamb, the sacredheart pierced with sharp arrows, or the poor Jesus sinking beneath thecross he carries. She tried, by way of mortification, to eat nothing awhole day. She puzzled her head to find some vow to fulfil.
When she went to confession, she invented little sins in order that shemight stay there longer, kneeling in the shadow, her hands joined,her face against the grating beneath the whispering of the priest.The comparisons of betrothed, husband, celestial lover, and eternalmarriage, that recur in sermons, stirred within her soul depths ofunexpected sweetness.
In the evening, before prayers, there was some religious reading inthe study. On week-nights it was some abstract of sacred history orthe Lectures of the Abbe Frayssinous, and on Sundays passages from the“Genie du Christianisme,” as a recreation. How she listened at first tothe sonorous lamentations of its romantic melancholies reechoingthrough the world and eternity! If her childhood had been spent in theshop-parlour of some business quarter, she might perhaps have openedher heart to those lyrical invasions of Nature, which usually come tous only through translation in books. But she knew the country too well;she knew the lowing of cattle, the milking, the ploughs.
Accustomed to calm aspects of life, she turned, on the contrary, tothose of excitement. She loved the sea only for the sake of its storms,and the green fields only when broken up by ruins.
She wanted to get some personal profit out of things, and she rejectedas useless all that did not contribute to the immediate desires of herheart, being of a temperament more sentimental than artistic, lookingfor emotions, not landscapes.
At the convent there was an old maid who came for a week each month tomend the linen. Patronized by the clergy, because she belonged to anancient family of noblemen ruined by the Revolution, she dined in therefectory at the table of the good sisters, and after the meal had a bitof chat with them before going back to her work. The girls often slippedout from the study to go and see her. She knew by heart the love songsof the last century, and sang them in a low voice as she stitched away.
She told stories, gave them news, went errands in the town, and onthe sly lent the big girls some novel, that she always carried in thepockets of her apron, and of which the good lady herself swallowedlong chapters in the intervals of her work. They were all love, lovers,sweethearts, persecuted ladies fainting in lonely pavilions, postilionskilled at every stage, horses ridden to death on every page, sombreforests, heartaches, vows, sobs, tears and kisses, little skiffs bymoonlight, nightingales in shady groves, “gentlemen” brave as lions,gentle as lambs, virtuous as no one ever was, always well dressed, andweeping like fountains. For six months, then, Emma, at fifteen years ofage, made her hands dirty with books from old lending libraries.
Through Walter Scott, later on, she fell in love with historical events,dreamed of old chests, guard-rooms and minstrels. She would have likedto live in some old manor-house, like those long-waisted chatelaineswho, in the shade of pointed arches, spent their days leaning on thestone, chin in hand, watching a cavalier with white plume galloping onhis black horse from the distant fields. At this time she had a cultfor Mary Stuart and enthusiastic veneration for illustrious or unhappywomen. Joan of Arc, Heloise, Agnes Sorel, the beautiful Ferroniere, andClemence Isaure stood out to her like comets in the dark immensity ofheaven, where also were seen, lost in shadow, and all unconnected, St.Louis with his oak, the dying Bayard, some cruelties of Louis XI, alittle of St. Bartholomew’s Day, the plume of the Bearnais, and alwaysthe remembrance of the plates painted in honour of Louis XIV.
In the music class, in the ballads she sang, there was nothing butlittle angels with golden wings, madonnas, lagunes, gondoliers;-mildcompositions that allowed her to catch a glimpse athwart the obscurityof style and the weakness of the music of the attractive phantasmagoriaof sentimental realities. Some of her companions brought “keepsakes” given them as new year’s gifts to the convent. These had to be hidden;it was quite an undertaking; they were read in the dormitory. Delicatelyhandling the beautiful satin bindings, Emma looked with dazzled eyes atthe names of the unknown authors, who had signed their verses for themost part as counts or viscounts.
She trembled as she blew back the tissue paper over the engraving andsaw it folded in two and fall gently against the page. Here behind thebalustrade of a balcony was a young man in a short cloak, holding in hisarms a young girl in a white dress wearing an alms-bag at her belt; orthere were nameless portraits of English ladies with fair curls, wholooked at you from under their round straw hats with their large cleareyes. Some there were lounging in their carriages, gliding throughparks, a greyhound bounding along in front of the equipage driven ata trot by two midget postilions in white breeches. Others, dreaming onsofas with an open letter, gazed at the moon through a slightly openwindow half draped by a black curtain. The naive ones, a tear on theircheeks, were kissing doves through the bars of a Gothic cage, or,smiling, their heads on one side, were plucking the leaves of amarguerite with their taper fingers, that curved at the tips like peakedshoes. And you, too, were there, Sultans with long pipes recliningbeneath arbours in the arms of Bayaderes; Djiaours, Turkish sabres,Greek caps; and you especially, pale landscapes of dithyrambic lands,that often show us at once palm trees and firs, tigers on the right, alion to the left, Tartar minarets on the horizon; the whole framed bya very neat virgin forest, and with a great perpendicular sunbeamtrembling in the water, where, standing out in relief like whiteexcoriations on a steel-grey ground, swans are swimming about.
And the shade of the argand lamp fastened to the wall above Emma’s headlighted up all these pictures of the world, that passed before her oneby one in the silence of the dormitory, and to the distant noise of somebelated carriage rolling over the Boulevards.
When her mother died she cried much the first few days. She had afuneral picture made with the hair of the deceased, and, in a lettersent to the Bertaux full of sad reflections on life, she asked to beburied later on in the same grave. The goodman thought she must be ill,and came to see her. Emma was secretly pleased that she had reached ata first attempt the rare ideal of pale lives, never attained by mediocrehearts. She let herself glide along with Lamartine meanderings, listenedto harps on lakes, to all the songs of dying swans, to the falling ofthe leaves, the pure virgins ascending to heaven, and the voice ofthe Eternal discoursing down the valleys. She wearied of it, would notconfess it, continued from habit, and at last was surprised to feelherself soothed, and with no more sadness at heart than wrinkles on herbrow.
The good nuns, who had been so sure of her vocation, perceived withgreat astonishment that Mademoiselle Rouault seemed to be slippingfrom them. They had indeed been so lavish to her of prayers, retreats,novenas, and sermons, they had so often preached the respect due tosaints and martyrs, and given so much good advice as to the modesty ofthe body and the salvation of her soul, that she did as tightly reinedhorses; she pulled up short and the bit slipped from her teeth. Thisnature, positive in the midst of its enthusiasms, that had loved thechurch for the sake of the flowers, and music for the words of thesongs, and literature for its passional stimulus, rebelled againstthe mysteries of faith as it grew irritated by discipline, a thingantipathetic to her constitution. When her father took her from school,no one was sorry to see her go. The Lady Superior even thought that shehad latterly been somewhat irreverent to the community.
Emma, at home once more, first took pleasure in looking after theservants, then grew disgusted with the country and missed her convent.When Charles came to the Bertaux for the first time, she thought herselfquite disillusioned, with nothing more to learn, and nothing more tofeel.
But the uneasiness of her new position, or perhaps the disturbancecaused by the presence of this man, had sufficed to make her believethat she at last felt that wondrous passion which, till then, like agreat bird with rose-coloured wings, hung in the splendour of the skiesof poesy; and now she could not think that the calm in which she livedwas the happiness she had dreamed.
Chapter Seven
She thought, sometimes, that, after all, this was the happiest timeof her life--the honeymoon, as people called it. To taste the fullsweetness of it, it would have been necessary doubtless to fly to thoselands with sonorous names where the days after marriage are full oflaziness most suave. In post chaises behind blue silken curtains to rideslowly up steep road, listening to the song of the postilion re-echoedby the mountains, along with the bells of goats and the muffled sound ofa waterfall; at sunset on the shores of gulfs to breathe in the perfumeof lemon trees; then in the evening on the villa-terraces above, hand inhand to look at the stars, making plans for the future. It seemed to herthat certain places on earth must bring happiness, as a plant peculiarto the soil, and that cannot thrive elsewhere. Why could not she leanover balconies in Swiss chalets, or enshrine her melancholy in a Scotchcottage, with a husband dressed in a black velvet coat with long tails,and thin shoes, a pointed hat and frills? Perhaps she would have likedto confide all these things to someone. But how tell an undefinableuneasiness, variable as the clouds, unstable as the winds? Words failedher--the opportunity, the courage.
If Charles had but wished it, if he had guessed it, if his look had butonce met her thought, it seemed to her that a sudden plenty would havegone out from her heart, as the fruit falls from a tree when shaken bya hand. But as the intimacy of their life became deeper, the greaterbecame the gulf that separated her from him.
Charles’s conversation was commonplace as a street pavement, andeveryone’s ideas trooped through it in their everyday garb, withoutexciting emotion, laughter, or thought. He had never had the curiosity,he said, while he lived at Rouen, to go to the theatre to see the actorsfrom Paris. He could neither swim, nor fence, nor shoot, and one dayhe could not explain some term of horsemanship to her that she had comeacross in a novel.
A man, on the contrary, should he not know everything, excel in manifoldactivities, initiate you into the energies of passion, the refinementsof life, all mysteries? But this one taught nothing, knew nothing,wished nothing. He thought her happy; and she resented this easy calm,this serene heaviness, the very happiness she gave him.
Sometimes she would draw; and it was great amusement to Charles to standthere bolt upright and watch her bend over her cardboard, with eyeshalf-closed the better to see her work, or rolling, between her fingers,little bread-pellets. As to the piano, the more quickly her fingersglided over it the more he wondered. She struck the notes with aplomb,and ran from top to bottom of the keyboard without a break. Thus shakenup, the old instrument, whose strings buzzed, could be heard at theother end of the village when the window was open, and often thebailiff’s clerk, passing along the highroad bare-headed and in listslippers, stopped to listen, his sheet of paper in his hand.
Emma, on the other hand, knew how to look after her house. She sent thepatients’ accounts in well-phrased letters that had no suggestion ofa bill. When they had a neighbour to dinner on Sundays, she managed tohave some tasty dish--piled up pyramids of greengages on vine leaves,served up preserves turned out into plates--and even spoke of buyingfinger-glasses for dessert. From all this much consideration wasextended to Bovary.
Charles finished by rising in his own esteem for possessing such a wife.He showed with pride in the sitting room two small pencil sketches byher that he had had framed in very large frames, and hung up against thewallpaper by long green cords. People returning from mass saw him at hisdoor in his wool-work slippers.
He came home late--at ten o’clock, at midnight sometimes. Then he askedfor something to eat, and as the servant had gone to bed, Emma waitedon him. He took off his coat to dine more at his ease. He told her, oneafter the other, the people he had met, the villages where he had been,the prescriptions he had written, and, well pleased with himself, hefinished the remainder of the boiled beef and onions, picked pieces offthe cheese, munched an apple, emptied his water-bottle, and then went tobed, and lay on his back and snored.
As he had been for a time accustomed to wear nightcaps, his handkerchiefwould not keep down over his ears, so that his hair in the morning wasall tumbled pell-mell about his face and whitened with the feathers ofthe pillow, whose strings came untied during the night. He always worethick boots that had two long creases over the instep running obliquelytowards the ankle, while the rest of the upper continued in a straightline as if stretched on a wooden foot. He said that “was quite goodenough for the country.”
His mother approved of his economy, for she came to see him as formerlywhen there had been some violent row at her place; and yet Madame Bovarysenior seemed prejudiced against her daughter-in-law. She thought “herways too fine for their position”; the wood, the sugar, and the candlesdisappeared as “at a grand establishment,” and the amount of firing inthe kitchen would have been enough for twenty-five courses. She put herlinen in order for her in the presses, and taught her to keep an eye onthe butcher when he brought the meat. Emma put up with these lessons.Madame Bovary was lavish of them; and the words “daughter” and “mother” were exchanged all day long, accompanied by little quiverings of thelips, each one uttering gentle words in a voice trembling with anger.
In Madame Dubuc’s time the old woman felt that she was still thefavorite; but now the love of Charles for Emma seemed to her a desertionfrom her tenderness, an encroachment upon what was hers, and she watchedher son’s happiness in sad silence, as a ruined man looks throughthe windows at people dining in his old house. She recalled to him asremembrances her troubles and her sacrifices, and, comparing these withEmma’s negligence, came to the conclusion that it was not reasonable toadore her so exclusively.
Charles knew not what to answer: he respected his mother, and he lovedhis wife infinitely; he considered the judgment of the one infallible,and yet he thought the conduct of the other irreproachable. When MadamBovary had gone, he tried timidly and in the same terms to hazard one ortwo of the more anodyne observations he had heard from his mamma. Emmaproved to him with a word that he was mistaken, and sent him off to hispatients.
And yet, in accord with theories she believed right, she wanted to makeherself in love with him. By moonlight in the garden she recited allthe passionate rhymes she knew by heart, and, sighing, sang to him manymelancholy adagios; but she found herself as calm after as before, andCharles seemed no more amorous and no more moved.
When she had thus for a while struck the flint on her heart withoutgetting a spark, incapable, moreover, of understanding what she didnot experience as of believing anything that did not present itselfin conventional forms, she persuaded herself without difficulty thatCharles’s passion was nothing very exorbitant. His outbursts becameregular; he embraced her at certain fixed times. It was one habit amongother habits, and, like a dessert, looked forward to after the monotonyof dinner.
A gamekeeper, cured by the doctor of inflammation of the lungs, hadgiven madame a little Italian greyhound; she took her out walking, forshe went out sometimes in order to be alone for a moment, and not to seebefore her eyes the eternal garden and the dusty road. She went as faras the beeches of Banneville, near the deserted pavilion which forms anangle of the wall on the side of the country. Amidst the vegetation ofthe ditch there are long reeds with leaves that cut you.
She began by looking round her to see if nothing had changed since lastshe had been there. She found again in the same places the foxgloves andwallflowers, the beds of nettles growing round the big stones, andthe patches of lichen along the three windows, whose shutters, alwaysclosed, were rotting away on their rusty iron bars. Her thoughts,aimless at first, wandered at random, like her greyhound, who ran roundand round in the fields, yelping after the yellow butterflies, chasingthe shrew-mice, or nibbling the poppies on the edge of a cornfield.
Then gradually her ideas took definite shape, and, sitting on the grassthat she dug up with little prods of her sunshade, Emma repeated toherself, “Good heavens! Why did I marry?”
She asked herself if by some other chance combination it would have notbeen possible to meet another man; and she tried to imagine what wouldhave been these unrealised events, this different life, this unknownhusband. All, surely, could not be like this one. He might have beenhandsome, witty, distinguished, attractive, such as, no doubt, her oldcompanions of the convent had married. What were they doing now? Intown, with the noise of the streets, the buzz of the theatres and thelights of the ballroom, they were living lives where the heart expands,the senses bourgeon out. But she--her life was cold as a garret whosedormer window looks on the north, and ennui, the silent spider, wasweaving its web in the darkness in every corner of her heart.
She recalled the prize days, when she mounted the platform to receiveher little crowns, with her hair in long plaits. In her white frock andopen prunella shoes she had a pretty way, and when she went back to herseat, the gentlemen bent over her to congratulate her; the courtyard wasfull of carriages; farewells were called to her through their windows;the music master with his violin case bowed in passing by. How far allof this! How far away! She called Djali, took her between her knees, andsmoothed the long delicate head, saying, “Come, kiss mistress; you haveno troubles.”
Then noting the melancholy face of the graceful animal, who yawnedslowly, she softened, and comparing her to herself, spoke to her aloudas to somebody in trouble whom one is consoling.
Occasionally there came gusts of winds, breezes from the sea rolling inone sweep over the whole plateau of the Caux country, which broughteven to these fields a salt freshness. The rushes, close to the ground,whistled; the branches trembled in a swift rustling, while theirsummits, ceaselessly swaying, kept up a deep murmur. Emma drew her shawlround her shoulders and rose.
In the avenue a green light dimmed by the leaves lit up the short mossthat crackled softly beneath her feet. The sun was setting; the skyshowed red between the branches, and the trunks of the trees, uniform,and planted in a straight line, seemed a brown colonnade standing outagainst a background of gold. A fear took hold of her; she called Djali,and hurriedly returned to Tostes by the high road, threw herself into anarmchair, and for the rest of the evening did not speak.
But towards the end of September something extraordinary fell upon herlife; she was invited by the Marquis d’Andervilliers to Vaubyessard.
Secretary of State under the Restoration, the Marquis, anxious tore-enter political life, set about preparing for his candidature tothe Chamber of Deputies long beforehand. In the winter he distributed agreat deal of wood, and in the Conseil General always enthusiasticallydemanded new roads for his arrondissement. During the dog-days he hadsuffered from an abscess, which Charles had cured as if by miracle bygiving a timely little touch with the lancet. The steward sent to Tostesto pay for the operation reported in the evening that he had seen somesuperb cherries in the doctor’s little garden. Now cherry trees did notthrive at Vaubyessard; the Marquis asked Bovary for some slips; made ithis business to thank his personally; saw Emma; thought she had a prettyfigure, and that she did not bow like a peasant; so that he did notthink he was going beyond the bounds of condescension, nor, on the otherhand, making a mistake, in inviting the young couple.
On Wednesday at three o’clock, Monsieur and Madame Bovary, seated intheir dog-cart, set out for Vaubyessard, with a great trunk strappedon behind and a bonnet-box in front of the apron. Besides these Charlesheld a bandbox between his knees.
They arrived at nightfall, just as the lamps in the park were being litto show the way for the carriages.
Chapter Eight
The château, a modern building in Italian style, with two projectingwings and three flights of steps, lay at the foot of an immensegreen-sward, on which some cows were grazing among groups of large treesset out at regular intervals, while large beds of arbutus, rhododendron,syringas, and guelder roses bulged out their irregular clusters ofgreen along the curve of the gravel path. A river flowed under a bridge;through the mist one could distinguish buildings with thatched roofsscattered over the field bordered by two gently sloping, well timberedhillocks, and in the background amid the trees rose in two parallellines the coach houses and stables, all that was left of the ruined oldchâteau.
Charles’s dog-cart pulled up before the middle flight of steps; servantsappeared; the Marquis came forward, and, offering his arm to thedoctor’s wife, conducted her to the vestibule.
It was paved with marble slabs, was very lofty, and the sound offootsteps and that of voices re-echoed through it as in a church.
Opposite rose a straight staircase, and on the left a galleryoverlooking the garden led to the billiard room, through whose door onecould hear the click of the ivory balls. As she crossed it to go to thedrawing room, Emma saw standing round the table men with grave faces,their chins resting on high cravats. They all wore orders, and smiledsilently as they made their strokes.
On the dark wainscoting of the walls large gold frames bore atthe bottom names written in black letters. She read: “Jean-Antoined’Andervilliers d’Yvervonbille, Count de la Vaubyessard and Baron de laFresnay, killed at the battle of Coutras on the 20th of October,1587.” And on another: “Jean-Antoine-Henry-Guy d’Andervilliers dela Vaubyessard, Admiral of France and Chevalier of the Order of St.Michael, wounded at the battle of the Hougue-Saint-Vaast on the 29th ofMay, 1692; died at Vaubyessard on the 23rd of January 1693.” One couldhardly make out those that followed, for the light of the lamps loweredover the green cloth threw a dim shadow round the room. Burnishing thehorizontal pictures, it broke up against these in delicate lines wherethere were cracks in the varnish, and from all these great black squaresframed in with gold stood out here and there some lighter portion of thepainting--a pale brow, two eyes that looked at you, perukes flowing overand powdering red-coated shoulders, or the buckle of a garter above awell-rounded calf.
The Marquis opened the drawing room door; one of the ladies (theMarchioness herself) came to meet Emma. She made her sit down by her onan ottoman, and began talking to her as amicably as if she had known hera long time. She was a woman of about forty, with fine shoulders, a hooknose, a drawling voice, and on this evening she wore over her brown haira simple guipure fichu that fell in a point at the back. A fair youngwoman sat in a high-backed chair in a corner; and gentlemen with flowersin their buttonholes were talking to ladies round the fire.
At seven dinner was served. The men, who were in the majority, sat downat the first table in the vestibule; the ladies at the second in thedining room with the Marquis and Marchioness.
Emma, on entering, felt herself wrapped round by the warm air, ablending of the perfume of flowers and of the fine linen, of the fumesof the viands, and the odour of the truffles. The silver dish coversreflected the lighted wax candles in the candelabra, the cut crystalcovered with light steam reflected from one to the other pale rays;bouquets were placed in a row the whole length of the table; and inthe large-bordered plates each napkin, arranged after the fashion of abishop’s mitre, held between its two gaping folds a small oval shapedroll. The red claws of lobsters hung over the dishes; rich fruit in openbaskets was piled up on moss; there were quails in their plumage; smokewas rising; and in silk stockings, knee-breeches, white cravat, andfrilled shirt, the steward, grave as a judge, offering ready carveddishes between the shoulders of the guests, with a touch of the spoongave you the piece chosen. On the large stove of porcelain inlaidwith copper baguettes the statue of a woman, draped to the chin, gazedmotionless on the room full of life.
Madame Bovary noticed that many ladies had not put their gloves in theirglasses.
But at the upper end of the table, alone amongst all these women, bentover his full plate, and his napkin tied round his neck like a child, anold man sat eating, letting drops of gravy drip from his mouth. His eyeswere bloodshot, and he wore a little queue tied with black ribbon. Hewas the Marquis’s father-in-law, the old Duke de Laverdiere, once ona time favourite of the Count d’Artois, in the days of the Vaudreuilhunting-parties at the Marquis de Conflans’, and had been, it was said,the lover of Queen Marie Antoinette, between Monsieur de Coigny andMonsieur de Lauzun. He had lived a life of noisy debauch, full of duels,bets, elopements; he had squandered his fortune and frightened all hisfamily. A servant behind his chair named aloud to him in his ear thedishes that he pointed to stammering, and constantly Emma’s eyesturned involuntarily to this old man with hanging lips, as to somethingextraordinary. He had lived at court and slept in the bed of queens!Iced champagne was poured out. Emma shivered all over as she feltit cold in her mouth. She had never seen pomegranates nor tastedpineapples. The powdered sugar even seemed to her whiter and finer thanelsewhere.
The ladies afterwards went to their rooms to prepare for the ball.
Emma made her toilet with the fastidious care of an actress on herdebut. She did her hair according to the directions of the hairdresser,and put on the barege dress spread out upon the bed.
Charles’s trousers were tight across the belly.
“My trouser-straps will be rather awkward for dancing,” he said.
“Dancing?” repeated Emma.
“Yes!”
“Why, you must be mad! They would make fun of you; keep your place.Besides, it is more becoming for a doctor,” she added.
Charles was silent. He walked up and down waiting for Emma to finishdressing.
He saw her from behind in the glass between two lights. Her black eyesseemed blacker than ever. Her hair, undulating towards the ears, shonewith a blue lustre; a rose in her chignon trembled on its mobile stalk,with artificial dewdrops on the tip of the leaves. She wore a gown ofpale saffron trimmed with three bouquets of pompon roses mixed withgreen.
Charles came and kissed her on her shoulder.
“Let me alone!” she said; “you are tumbling me.”
One could hear the flourish of the violin and the notes of a horn. Shewent downstairs restraining herself from running.
Dancing had begun. Guests were arriving. There was some crushing.
She sat down on a form near the door.
The quadrille over, the floor was occupied by groups of men standing upand talking and servants in livery bearing large trays. Along the lineof seated women painted fans were fluttering, bouquets half hid smilingfaces, and gold stoppered scent-bottles were turned in partly-closedhands, whose white gloves outlined the nails and tightened on the fleshat the wrists. Lace trimmings, diamond brooches, medallion braceletstrembled on bodices, gleamed on breasts, clinked on bare arms.
The hair, well-smoothed over the temples and knotted at the nape,bore crowns, or bunches, or sprays of myosotis, jasmine, pomegranateblossoms, ears of corn, and corn-flowers. Calmly seated in their places,mothers with forbidding countenances were wearing red turbans.
Emma’s heart beat rather faster when, her partner holding her by thetips of the fingers, she took her place in a line with the dancers, andwaited for the first note to start. But her emotion soon vanished, and,swaying to the rhythm of the orchestra, she glided forward with slightmovements of the neck. A smile rose to her lips at certain delicatephrases of the violin, that sometimes played alone while the otherinstruments were silent; one could hear the clear clink of the louisd’or that were being thrown down upon the card tables in the next room;then all struck again, the cornet-a-piston uttered its sonorous note,feet marked time, skirts swelled and rustled, hands touched and parted;the same eyes falling before you met yours again.
A few men (some fifteen or so), of twenty-five to forty, scattered hereand there among the dancers or talking at the doorways, distinguishedthemselves from the crowd by a certain air of breeding, whatever theirdifferences in age, dress, or face.
Their clothes, better made, seemed of finer cloth, and their hair,brought forward in curls towards the temples, glossy with more delicatepomades. They had the complexion of wealth--that clear complexion thatis heightened by the pallor of porcelain, the shimmer of satin, theveneer of old furniture, and that an ordered regimen of exquisitenurture maintains at its best. Their necks moved easily in their lowcravats, their long whiskers fell over their turned-down collars, theywiped their lips upon handkerchiefs with embroidered initials that gaveforth a subtle perfume. Those who were beginning to grow old had an airof youth, while there was something mature in the faces of the young.In their unconcerned looks was the calm of passions daily satiated, andthrough all their gentleness of manner pierced that peculiar brutality,the result of a command of half-easy things, in which force is exercisedand vanity amused--the management of thoroughbred horses and the societyof loose women.
A few steps from Emma a gentleman in a blue coat was talking of Italywith a pale young woman wearing a parure of pearls.
They were praising the breadth of the columns of St. Peter’s, Tivoly,Vesuvius, Castellamare, and Cassines, the roses of Genoa, the Coliseumby moonlight. With her other ear Emma was listening to a conversationfull of words she did not understand. A circle gathered round a veryyoung man who the week before had beaten “Miss Arabella” and “Romolus,” and won two thousand louis jumping a ditch in England. One complainedthat his racehorses were growing fat; another of the printers’ errorsthat had disfigured the name of his horse.
The atmosphere of the ball was heavy; the lamps were growing dim.
Guests were flocking to the billiard room. A servant got upon a chairand broke the window-panes. At the crash of the glass Madame Bovaryturned her head and saw in the garden the faces of peasants pressedagainst the window looking in at them. Then the memory of the Bertauxcame back to her. She saw the farm again, the muddy pond, her father ina blouse under the apple trees, and she saw herself again as formerly,skimming with her finger the cream off the milk-pans in the dairy. Butin the refulgence of the present hour her past life, so distinct untilthen, faded away completely, and she almost doubted having lived it. Shewas there; beyond the ball was only shadow overspreading all the rest.She was just eating a maraschino ice that she held with her left handin a silver-gilt cup, her eyes half-closed, and the spoon between herteeth.
A lady near her dropped her fan. A gentlemen was passing.
“Would you be so good,” said the lady, “as to pick up my fan that hasfallen behind the sofa?”
The gentleman bowed, and as he moved to stretch out his arm, Emma sawthe hand of a young woman throw something white, folded in a triangle,into his hat. The gentleman, picking up the fan, offered it to the ladyrespectfully; she thanked him with an inclination of the head, and begansmelling her bouquet.
After supper, where were plenty of Spanish and Rhine wines, soups _à labisque_ and _au lait d’amandes_,[8] puddings _à la Trafalgar_, and allsorts of cold meats with jellies that trembled in the dishes, thecarriages one after the other began to drive off. Raising the cornersof the muslin curtain, one could see the light of their lanternsglimmering through the darkness. The seats began to empty, somecard-players were still left; the musicians were cooling the tips oftheir fingers on their tongues. Charles was half asleep, his backpropped against a door.
[8] With almond milk
At three o’clock the cotillion began. Emma did not know how to waltz.Everyone was waltzing, Mademoiselle d’Andervilliers herself and theMarquis; only the guests staying at the castle were still there, about adozen persons.
One of the waltzers, however, who was familiarly called Viscount, andwhose low cut waistcoat seemed moulded to his chest, came a second timeto ask Madame Bovary to dance, assuring her that he would guide her, andthat she would get through it very well.
They began slowly, then went more rapidly. They turned; all around themwas turning--the lamps, the furniture, the wainscoting, the floor, likea disc on a pivot. On passing near the doors the bottom of Emma’s dresscaught against his trousers.
Their legs commingled; he looked down at her; she raised her eyes tohis. A torpor seized her; she stopped. They started again, and with amore rapid movement; the Viscount, dragging her along disappeared withher to the end of the gallery, where panting, she almost fell, and fora moment rested her head upon his breast. And then, still turning, butmore slowly, he guided her back to her seat. She leaned back against thewall and covered her eyes with her hands.
When she opened them again, in the middle of the drawing room threewaltzers were kneeling before a lady sitting on a stool.
She chose the Viscount, and the violin struck up once more.
Everyone looked at them. They passed and re-passed, she with rigid body,her chin bent down, and he always in the same pose, his figure curved,his elbow rounded, his chin thrown forward. That woman knew how towaltz! They kept up a long time, and tired out all the others.
Then they talked a few moments longer, and after the goodnights, orrather good mornings, the guests of the château retired to bed.
Charles dragged himself up by the balusters. His “knees were goingup into his body.” He had spent five consecutive hours standingbolt upright at the card tables, watching them play whist, withoutunderstanding anything about it, and it was with a deep sigh of reliefthat he pulled off his boots.
Emma threw a shawl over her shoulders, opened the window, and leant out.
The night was dark; some drops of rain were falling. She breathed in thedamp wind that refreshed her eyelids. The music of the ball was stillmurmuring in her ears. And she tried to keep herself awake in order toprolong the illusion of this luxurious life that she would soon have togive up.
Day began to break. She looked long at the windows of the château,trying to guess which were the rooms of all those she had noticed theevening before. She would fain have known their lives, have penetrated,blended with them. But she was shivering with cold. She undressed, andcowered down between the sheets against Charles, who was asleep.
There were a great many people to luncheon. The repast lasted tenminutes; no liqueurs were served, which astonished the doctor.
Next, Mademoiselle d’Andervilliers collected some pieces of roll in asmall basket to take them to the swans on the ornamental waters, andthey went to walk in the hot-houses, where strange plants, bristlingwith hairs, rose in pyramids under hanging vases, whence, as fromover-filled nests of serpents, fell long green cords interlacing.The orangery, which was at the other end, led by a covered way to theouthouses of the château. The Marquis, to amuse the young woman, tookher to see the stables.
Above the basket-shaped racks porcelain slabs bore the names of thehorses in black letters. Each animal in its stall whisked its tail whenanyone went near and said “Tchk! tchk!” The boards of the harness roomshone like the flooring of a drawing room. The carriage harness waspiled up in the middle against two twisted columns, and the bits, thewhips, the spurs, the curbs, were ranged in a line all along the wall.
Charles, meanwhile, went to ask a groom to put his horse to. Thedog-cart was brought to the foot of the steps, and, all the parcelsbeing crammed in, the Bovarys paid their respects to the Marquis andMarchioness and set out again for Tostes.
Emma watched the turning wheels in silence. Charles, on the extreme edgeof the seat, held the reins with his two arms wide apart, and the littlehorse ambled along in the shafts that were too big for him. The loosereins hanging over his crupper were wet with foam, and the box fastenedon behind the chaise gave great regular bumps against it.
They were on the heights of Thibourville when suddenly some horsemenwith cigars between their lips passed laughing. Emma thought sherecognized the Viscount, turned back, and caught on the horizon only themovement of the heads rising or falling with the unequal cadence of thetrot or gallop.
A mile farther on they had to stop to mend with some string the tracesthat had broken.
But Charles, giving a last look to the harness, saw something on theground between his horse’s legs, and he picked up a cigar-case witha green silk border and beblazoned in the centre like the door of acarriage.
“There are even two cigars in it,” said he; “they’ll do for this eveningafter dinner.”
“Why, do you smoke?” she asked.
“Sometimes, when I get a chance.”
He put his find in his pocket and whipped up the nag.
When they reached home the dinner was not ready. Madame lost her temper.Nastasie answered rudely.
“Leave the room!” said Emma. “You are forgetting yourself. I give youwarning.”
For dinner there was onion soup and a piece of veal with sorrel.
Charles, seated opposite Emma, rubbed his hands gleefully.
“How good it is to be at home again!”
Nastasie could be heard crying. He was rather fond of the poor girl.She had formerly, during the wearisome time of his widowhood, kept himcompany many an evening. She had been his first patient, his oldestacquaintance in the place.
“Have you given her warning for good?” he asked at last.
“Yes. Who is to prevent me?” she replied.
Then they warmed themselves in the kitchen while their room was beingmade ready. Charles began to smoke. He smoked with lips protruding,spitting every moment, recoiling at every puff.
“You’ll make yourself ill,” she said scornfully.
He put down his cigar and ran to swallow a glass of cold water at thepump. Emma seizing hold of the cigar case threw it quickly to the backof the cupboard.
The next day was a long one. She walked about her little garden, upand down the same walks, stopping before the beds, before the espalier,before the plaster curate, looking with amazement at all these thingsof once-on-a-time that she knew so well. How far off the ball seemedalready! What was it that thus set so far asunder the morning of the daybefore yesterday and the evening of to-day? Her journey to Vaubyessardhad made a hole in her life, like one of those great crevices thata storm will sometimes make in one night in mountains. Still she wasresigned. She devoutly put away in her drawers her beautiful dress, downto the satin shoes whose soles were yellowed with the slippery wax ofthe dancing floor. Her heart was like these. In its friction againstwealth something had come over it that could not be effaced.
The memory of this ball, then, became an occupation for Emma.
Whenever the Wednesday came round she said to herself as she awoke, “Ah!I was there a week--a fortnight--three weeks ago.”
And little by little the faces grew confused in her remembrance.
She forgot the tune of the quadrilles; she no longer saw the liveriesand appointments so distinctly; some details escaped her, but the regretremained with her.
Chapter Nine
Often when Charles was out she took from the cupboard, between thefolds of the linen where she had left it, the green silk cigar case.She looked at it, opened it, and even smelt the odour of the lining--amixture of verbena and tobacco. Whose was it? The Viscount’s? Perhapsit was a present from his mistress. It had been embroidered on somerosewood frame, a pretty little thing, hidden from all eyes, that hadoccupied many hours, and over which had fallen the soft curls of thepensive worker. A breath of love had passed over the stitches on thecanvas; each prick of the needle had fixed there a hope or a memory, andall those interwoven threads of silk were but the continuity of the samesilent passion. And then one morning the Viscount had taken it awaywith him. Of what had they spoken when it lay upon the wide-mantelledchimneys between flower-vases and Pompadour clocks? She was at Tostes;he was at Paris now, far away! What was this Paris like? What a vaguename! She repeated it in a low voice, for the mere pleasure of it; itrang in her ears like a great cathedral bell; it shone before her eyes,even on the labels of her pomade-pots.
At night, when the carriers passed under her windows in their cartssinging the “Marjolaine,” she awoke, and listened to the noise of theiron-bound wheels, which, as they gained the country road, was soondeadened by the soil. “They will be there to-morrow!” she said toherself.
And she followed them in thought up and down the hills, traversingvillages, gliding along the highroads by the light of the stars. At theend of some indefinite distance there was always a confused spot, intowhich her dream died.
She bought a plan of Paris, and with the tip of her finger on the mapshe walked about the capital. She went up the boulevards, stopping atevery turning, between the lines of the streets, in front of the whitesquares that represented the houses. At last she would close the lids ofher weary eyes, and see in the darkness the gas jets flaring in the windand the steps of carriages lowered with much noise before the peristylesof theatres.
She took in “La Corbeille,” a lady’s journal, and the “Sylphe desSalons.” She devoured, without skipping a word, all the accounts offirst nights, races, and soirees, took interest in the debut of asinger, in the opening of a new shop. She knew the latest fashions, theaddresses of the best tailors, the days of the Bois and the Opera. InEugene Sue she studied descriptions of furniture; she read Balzac andGeorge Sand, seeking in them imaginary satisfaction for her own desires.Even at table she had her book by her, and turned over the pageswhile Charles ate and talked to her. The memory of the Viscount alwaysreturned as she read. Between him and the imaginary personages she madecomparisons. But the circle of which he was the centre gradually widenedround him, and the aureole that he bore, fading from his form, broadenedout beyond, lighting up her other dreams.
Paris, more vague than the ocean, glimmered before Emma’s eyes in anatmosphere of vermilion. The many lives that stirred amid this tumultwere, however, divided into parts, classed as distinct pictures. Emmaperceived only two or three that hid from her all the rest, and inthemselves represented all humanity. The world of ambassadors moved overpolished floors in drawing rooms lined with mirrors, round oval tablescovered with velvet and gold-fringed cloths. There were dresses withtrains, deep mysteries, anguish hidden beneath smiles. Then came thesociety of the duchesses; all were pale; all got up at four o’clock; thewomen, poor angels, wore English point on their petticoats; and the men,unappreciated geniuses under a frivolous outward seeming, rode horses todeath at pleasure parties, spent the summer season at Baden, and towardsthe forties married heiresses. In the private rooms of restaurants,where one sups after midnight by the light of wax candles, laughed themotley crowd of men of letters and actresses. They were prodigal askings, full of ideal, ambitious, fantastic frenzy. This was an existenceoutside that of all others, between heaven and earth, in the midst ofstorms, having something of the sublime. For the rest of the world itwas lost, with no particular place and as if non-existent. The nearerthings were, moreover, the more her thoughts turned away from them.All her immediate surroundings, the wearisome country, the middle-classimbeciles, the mediocrity of existence, seemed to her exceptional, apeculiar chance that had caught hold of her, while beyond stretched, asfar as eye could see, an immense land of joys and passions. She confusedin her desire the sensualities of luxury with the delights of the heart,elegance of manners with delicacy of sentiment. Did not love, likeIndian plants, need a special soil, a particular temperature? Signsby moonlight, long embraces, tears flowing over yielded hands, allthe fevers of the flesh and the languors of tenderness could not beseparated from the balconies of great castles full of indolence,from boudoirs with silken curtains and thick carpets, well-filledflower-stands, a bed on a raised dias, nor from the flashing of preciousstones and the shoulder-knots of liveries.
The lad from the posting house who came to groom the mare every morningpassed through the passage with his heavy wooden shoes; there were holesin his blouse; his feet were bare in list slippers. And this was thegroom in knee-britches with whom she had to be content! His work done,he did not come back again all day, for Charles on his return put uphis horse himself, unsaddled him and put on the halter, while theservant-girl brought a bundle of straw and threw it as best she couldinto the manger.
To replace Nastasie (who left Tostes shedding torrents of tears) Emmatook into her service a young girl of fourteen, an orphan with a sweetface. She forbade her wearing cotton caps, taught her to address her inthe third person, to bring a glass of water on a plate, to knock beforecoming into a room, to iron, starch, and to dress her--wanted to make alady’s-maid of her. The new servant obeyed without a murmur, so as notto be sent away; and as madame usually left the key in the sideboard,Félicité every evening took a small supply of sugar that she ate alonein her bed after she had said her prayers.
Sometimes in the afternoon she went to chat with the postilions.
Madame was in her room upstairs. She wore an open dressing gown thatshowed between the shawl facings of her bodice a pleated chamisette withthree gold buttons. Her belt was a corded girdle with great tassels, andher small garnet coloured slippers had a large knot of ribbon that fellover her instep. She had bought herself a blotting book, writing case,pen-holder, and envelopes, although she had no one to write to; shedusted her what-not, looked at herself in the glass, picked up a book,and then, dreaming between the lines, let it drop on her knees. Shelonged to travel or to go back to her convent. She wished at the sametime to die and to live in Paris.
Charles in snow and rain trotted across country. He ate omelettes onfarmhouse tables, poked his arm into damp beds, received the tepidspurt of blood-lettings in his face, listened to death-rattles, examinedbasins, turned over a good deal of dirty linen; but every evening hefound a blazing fire, his dinner ready, easy-chairs, and a well-dressedwoman, charming with an odour of freshness, though no one could saywhence the perfume came, or if it were not her skin that made odorousher chemise.
She charmed him by numerous attentions; now it was some new way ofarranging paper sconces for the candles, a flounce that she altered onher gown, or an extraordinary name for some very simple dish that theservant had spoilt, but that Charles swallowed with pleasure to the lastmouthful. At Rouen she saw some ladies who wore a bunch of charms on thewatch-chains; she bought some charms. She wanted for her mantelpiece twolarge blue glass vases, and some time after an ivory necessaire with asilver-gilt thimble. The less Charles understood these refinementsthe more they seduced him. They added something to the pleasure of thesenses and to the comfort of his fireside. It was like a golden dustsanding all along the narrow path of his life.
He was well, looked well; his reputation was firmly established.
The country-folk loved him because he was not proud. He petted thechildren, never went to the public house, and, moreover, his moralsinspired confidence. He was specially successful with catarrhs and chestcomplaints. Being much afraid of killing his patients, Charles, in factonly prescribed sedatives, from time to time and emetic, a footbath,or leeches. It was not that he was afraid of surgery; he bled peoplecopiously like horses, and for the taking out of teeth he had the“devil’s own wrist.”
Finally, to keep up with the times, he took in “La Ruche Medicale,” a new journal whose prospectus had been sent him. He read it a littleafter dinner, but in about five minutes the warmth of the room added tothe effect of his dinner sent him to sleep; and he sat there, his chinon his two hands and his hair spreading like a mane to the foot of thelamp. Emma looked at him and shrugged her shoulders. Why, at least, wasnot her husband one of those men of taciturn passions who work at theirbooks all night, and at last, when about sixty, the age of rheumatismsets in, wear a string of orders on their ill-fitting black coat?She could have wished this name of Bovary, which was hers, had beenillustrious, to see it displayed at the booksellers’, repeated in thenewspapers, known to all France. But Charles had no ambition.
An Yvetot doctor whom he had lately met in consultation had somewhathumiliated him at the very bedside of the patient, before the assembledrelatives. When, in the evening, Charles told her this anecdote, Emmainveighed loudly against his colleague. Charles was much touched. Hekissed her forehead with a tear in his eyes. But she was angered withshame; she felt a wild desire to strike him; she went to open the windowin the passage and breathed in the fresh air to calm herself.
“What a man! What a man!” she said in a low voice, biting her lips.
Besides, she was becoming more irritated with him. As he grew older hismanner grew heavier; at dessert he cut the corks of the empty bottles;after eating he cleaned his teeth with his tongue; in taking souphe made a gurgling noise with every spoonful; and, as he was gettingfatter, the puffed-out cheeks seemed to push the eyes, always small, upto the temples.
Sometimes Emma tucked the red borders of his under-vest unto hiswaistcoat, rearranged his cravat, and threw away the dirty gloves he wasgoing to put on; and this was not, as he fancied, for himself; itwas for herself, by a diffusion of egotism, of nervous irritation.Sometimes, too, she told him of what she had read, such as a passage ina novel, of a new play, or an anecdote of the “upper ten” that shehad seen in a feuilleton; for, after all, Charles was something, anever-open ear, and ever-ready approbation. She confided many a thing toher greyhound. She would have done so to the logs in the fireplace or tothe pendulum of the clock.
At the bottom of her heart, however, she was waiting for something tohappen. Like shipwrecked sailors, she turned despairing eyes upon thesolitude of her life, seeking afar off some white sail in the mists ofthe horizon. She did not know what this chance would be, what wind wouldbring it her, towards what shore it would drive her, if it would be ashallop or a three-decker, laden with anguish or full of bliss to theportholes. But each morning, as she awoke, she hoped it would come thatday; she listened to every sound, sprang up with a start, wondered thatit did not come; then at sunset, always more saddened, she longed forthe morrow.
Spring came round. With the first warm weather, when the pear treesbegan to blossom, she suffered from dyspnoea.
From the beginning of July she counted how many weeks there were toOctober, thinking that perhaps the Marquis d’Andervilliers would giveanother ball at Vaubyessard. But all September passed without letters orvisits.
After the ennui of this disappointment her heart once more remainedempty, and then the same series of days recommenced. So now they wouldthus follow one another, always the same, immovable, and bringingnothing. Other lives, however flat, had at least the chance of someevent. One adventure sometimes brought with it infinite consequences andthe scene changed. But nothing happened to her; God had willed it so!The future was a dark corridor, with its door at the end shut fast.
She gave up music. What was the good of playing? Who would hear her?Since she could never, in a velvet gown with short sleeves, strikingwith her light fingers the ivory keys of an Erard at a concert, feelthe murmur of ecstasy envelop her like a breeze, it was not worth whileboring herself with practicing. Her drawing cardboard and her embroideryshe left in the cupboard. What was the good? What was the good? Sewingirritated her. “I have read everything,” she said to herself. And shesat there making the tongs red-hot, or looked at the rain falling.
How sad she was on Sundays when vespers sounded! She listened with dullattention to each stroke of the cracked bell. A cat slowly walking oversome roof put up his back in the pale rays of the sun. The wind on thehighroad blew up clouds of dust. Afar off a dog sometimes howled; andthe bell, keeping time, continued its monotonous ringing that died awayover the fields.
But the people came out from church. The women in waxed clogs, thepeasants in new blouses, the little bare-headed children skipping alongin front of them, all were going home. And till nightfall, five or sixmen, always the same, stayed playing at corks in front of the large doorof the inn.
The winter was severe. The windows every morning were covered withrime, and the light shining through them, dim as through ground-glass,sometimes did not change the whole day long. At four o’clock the lamphad to be lighted.
On fine days she went down into the garden. The dew had left on thecabbages a silver lace with long transparent threads spreading from oneto the other. No birds were to be heard; everything seemed asleep, theespalier covered with straw, and the vine, like a great sick serpentunder the coping of the wall, along which, on drawing near, one saw themany-footed woodlice crawling. Under the spruce by the hedgerow, thecuré in the three-cornered hat reading his breviary had lost his rightfoot, and the very plaster, scaling off with the frost, had left whitescabs on his face.
Then she went up again, shut her door, put on coals, and fainting withthe heat of the hearth, felt her boredom weigh more heavily than ever.She would have liked to go down and talk to the servant, but a sense ofshame restrained her.
Every day at the same time the schoolmaster in a black skullcap openedthe shutters of his house, and the rural policeman, wearing his sabreover his blouse, passed by. Night and morning the post-horses, three bythree, crossed the street to water at the pond. From time to time thebell of a public house door rang, and when it was windy one could hearthe little brass basins that served as signs for the hairdresser’s shopcreaking on their two rods. This shop had as decoration an old engravingof a fashion-plate stuck against a windowpane and the wax bust of awoman with yellow hair. He, too, the hairdresser, lamented his wastedcalling, his hopeless future, and dreaming of some shop in a bigtown--at Rouen, for example, overlooking the harbour, near thetheatre--he walked up and down all day from the mairie to the church,sombre and waiting for customers. When Madame Bovary looked up, shealways saw him there, like a sentinel on duty, with his skullcap overhis ears and his vest of lasting.
Sometimes in the afternoon outside the window of her room, the head of aman appeared, a swarthy head with black whiskers, smiling slowly, witha broad, gentle smile that showed his white teeth. A waltz immediatelybegan and on the organ, in a little drawing room, dancers the size ofa finger, women in pink turbans, Tyrolians in jackets, monkeys in frockcoats, gentlemen in knee-breeches, turned and turned between the sofas,the consoles, multiplied in the bits of looking glass held togetherat their corners by a piece of gold paper. The man turned his handle,looking to the right and left, and up at the windows. Now and again,while he shot out a long squirt of brown saliva against the milestone,with his knee raised his instrument, whose hard straps tired hisshoulder; and now, doleful and drawling, or gay and hurried, the musicescaped from the box, droning through a curtain of pink taffeta undera brass claw in arabesque. They were airs played in other places atthe theatres, sung in drawing rooms, danced to at night under lightedlustres, echoes of the world that reached even to Emma. Endlesssarabands ran through her head, and, like an Indian dancing girl on theflowers of a carpet, her thoughts leapt with the notes, swung from dreamto dream, from sadness to sadness. When the man had caught some coppersin his cap, he drew down an old cover of blue cloth, hitched his organon to his back, and went off with a heavy tread. She watched him going.
But it was above all the meal-times that were unbearable to her, in thissmall room on the ground floor, with its smoking stove, its creakingdoor, the walls that sweated, the damp flags; all the bitterness in lifeseemed served up on her plate, and with smoke of the boiled beef thererose from her secret soul whiffs of sickliness. Charles was a sloweater; she played with a few nuts, or, leaning on her elbow, amusedherself with drawing lines along the oilcloth table cover with the pointof her knife.
She now let everything in her household take care of itself, and MadameBovary senior, when she came to spend part of Lent at Tostes, was muchsurprised at the change. She who was formerly so careful, so dainty,now passed whole days without dressing, wore grey cotton stockings, andburnt tallow candles. She kept saying they must be economical sincethey were not rich, adding that she was very contented, very happy, thatTostes pleased her very much, with other speeches that closed the mouthof her mother-in-law. Besides, Emma no longer seemed inclined to followher advice; once even, Madame Bovary having thought fit to maintain thatmistresses ought to keep an eye on the religion of their servants, shehad answered with so angry a look and so cold a smile that the goodwoman did not interfere again.
Emma was growing difficult, capricious. She ordered dishes for herself,then she did not touch them; one day drank only pure milk, the nextcups of tea by the dozen. Often she persisted in not going out, then,stifling, threw open the windows and put on light dresses. After she hadwell scolded her servant she gave her presents or sent her out to seeneighbours, just as she sometimes threw beggars all the silver in herpurse, although she was by no means tender-hearted or easily accessibleto the feelings of others, like most country-bred people, who alwaysretain in their souls something of the horny hardness of the paternalhands.
Towards the end of February old Rouault, in memory of his cure, himselfbrought his son-in-law a superb turkey, and stayed three days at Tostes.Charles being with his patients, Emma kept him company. He smoked in theroom, spat on the firedogs, talked farming, calves, cows, poultry, andmunicipal council, so that when he left she closed the door on him witha feeling of satisfaction that surprised even herself. Moreover she nolonger concealed her contempt for anything or anybody, and at times sheset herself to express singular opinions, finding fault with that whichothers approved, and approving things perverse and immoral, all of whichmade her husband open his eyes widely.
Would this misery last for ever? Would she never issue from it? Yetshe was as good as all the women who were living happily. She had seenduchesses at Vaubyessard with clumsier waists and commoner ways, and sheexecrated the injustice of God. She leant her head against the wallsto weep; she envied lives of stir; longed for masked balls, for violentpleasures, with all the wildness that she did not know, but that thesemust surely yield.
She grew pale and suffered from palpitations of the heart.
Charles prescribed valerian and camphor baths. Everything that was triedonly seemed to irritate her the more.
On certain days she chatted with feverish rapidity, and thisover-excitement was suddenly followed by a state of torpor, in whichshe remained without speaking, without moving. What then revived her waspouring a bottle of eau-de-cologne over her arms.
As she was constantly complaining about Tostes, Charles fancied that herillness was no doubt due to some local cause, and fixing on this idea,began to think seriously of setting up elsewhere.
From that moment she drank vinegar, contracted a sharp little cough, andcompletely lost her appetite.
It cost Charles much to give up Tostes after living there four years and“when he was beginning to get on there.” Yet if it must be! He took herto Rouen to see his old master. It was a nervous complaint: change ofair was needed.
After looking about him on this side and on that, Charles learnt thatin the Neufchâtel arrondissement there was a considerable market towncalled Yonville-l’Abbaye, whose doctor, a Polish refugee, had decamped aweek before. Then he wrote to the chemist of the place to ask thenumber of the population, the distance from the nearest doctor, whathis predecessor had made a year, and so forth; and the answer beingsatisfactory, he made up his mind to move towards the spring, if Emma’shealth did not improve.
One day when, in view of her departure, she was tidying a drawer,something pricked her finger. It was a wire of her wedding bouquet.The orange blossoms were yellow with dust and the silver bordered satinribbons frayed at the edges. She threw it into the fire. It flaredup more quickly than dry straw. Then it was, like a red bush in thecinders, slowly devoured. She watched it burn.
The little pasteboard berries burst, the wire twisted, the goldlace melted; and the shriveled paper corollas, fluttering like blackbutterflies at the back of the stove, at last flew up the chimney.
When they left Tostes at the month of March, Madame Bovary was pregnant.
Part II
Chapter One
Yonville-l’Abbaye (so called from an old Capuchin abbey of which noteven the ruins remain) is a market-town twenty-four miles from Rouen,between the Abbeville and Beauvais roads, at the foot of a valleywatered by the Rieule, a little river that runs into the Andelle afterturning three water-mills near its mouth, where there are a few troutthat the lads amuse themselves by fishing for on Sundays.
We leave the highroad at La Boissiere and keep straight on to the top ofthe Leux hill, whence the valley is seen. The river that runs through itmakes of it, as it were, two regions with distinct physiognomies--all onthe left is pasture land, all of the right arable. The meadow stretchesunder a bulge of low hills to join at the back with the pasture land ofthe Bray country, while on the eastern side, the plain, gently rising,broadens out, showing as far as eye can follow its blond cornfields. Thewater, flowing by the grass, divides with a white line the colour of theroads and of the plains, and the country is like a great unfolded mantlewith a green velvet cape bordered with a fringe of silver.
Before us, on the verge of the horizon, lie the oaks of the forest ofArgueil, with the steeps of the Saint-Jean hills scarred from topto bottom with red irregular lines; they are rain tracks, and thesebrick-tones standing out in narrow streaks against the grey colour ofthe mountain are due to the quantity of iron springs that flow beyond inthe neighboring country.
Here we are on the confines of Normandy, Picardy, and the Ile-de-France,a bastard land whose language is without accent and its landscape iswithout character. It is there that they make the worst Neufchâtelcheeses of all the arrondissement; and, on the other hand, farming iscostly because so much manure is needed to enrich this friable soil fullof sand and flints.
Up to 1835 there was no practicable road for getting to Yonville, butabout this time a cross-road was made which joins that of Abbeville tothat of Amiens, and is occasionally used by the Rouen wagoners on theirway to Flanders. Yonville-l’Abbaye has remained stationary in spite ofits “new outlet.” Instead of improving the soil, they persist in keepingup the pasture lands, however depreciated they may be in value, andthe lazy borough, growing away from the plain, has naturally spreadriverwards. It is seem from afar sprawling along the banks like acowherd taking a siesta by the water-side.
At the foot of the hill beyond the bridge begins a roadway, plantedwith young aspens, that leads in a straight line to the first houses inthe place. These, fenced in by hedges, are in the middle of courtyardsfull of straggling buildings, wine-presses, cart-sheds and distilleriesscattered under thick trees, with ladders, poles, or scythes hung on tothe branches. The thatched roofs, like fur caps drawn over eyes, reachdown over about a third of the low windows, whose coarse convex glasseshave knots in the middle like the bottoms of bottles. Against theplaster wall diagonally crossed by black joists, a meagre pear-treesometimes leans and the ground-floors have at their door a smallswing-gate to keep out the chicks that come pilfering crumbs of breadsteeped in cider on the threshold. But the courtyards grow narrower,the houses closer together, and the fences disappear; a bundle of fernsswings under a window from the end of a broomstick; there is ablacksmith’s forge and then a wheelwright’s, with two or three newcarts outside that partly block the way. Then across an open spaceappears a white house beyond a grass mound ornamented by a Cupid, hisfinger on his lips; two brass vases are at each end of a flight ofsteps; scutcheons[9] blaze upon the door. It is the notary’s house, andthe finest in the place.
[9] The _panonceaux_ that have to be hung over the doors of notaries.
The Church is on the other side of the street, twenty paces fartherdown, at the entrance of the square. The little cemetery that surroundsit, closed in by a wall breast high, is so full of graves that the oldstones, level with the ground, form a continuous pavement, on which thegrass of itself has marked out regular green squares. The church wasrebuilt during the last years of the reign of Charles X. The wooden roofis beginning to rot from the top, and here and there has black hollowsin its blue colour. Over the door, where the organ should be, is aloft for the men, with a spiral staircase that reverberates under theirwooden shoes.
The daylight coming through the plain glass windows falls obliquely uponthe pews ranged along the walls, which are adorned here and there witha straw mat bearing beneath it the words in large letters, “Mr.So-and-so’s pew.” Farther on, at a spot where the building narrows, theconfessional forms a pendant to a statuette of the Virgin, clothed ina satin robe, coifed with a tulle veil sprinkled with silver stars, andwith red cheeks, like an idol of the Sandwich Islands; and, finally, acopy of the “Holy Family, presented by the Minister of the Interior,” overlooking the high altar, between four candlesticks, closes in theperspective. The choir stalls, of deal wood, have been left unpainted.
The market, that is to say, a tiled roof supported by some twenty posts,occupies of itself about half the public square of Yonville. The townhall, constructed “from the designs of a Paris architect,” is a sort ofGreek temple that forms the corner next to the chemist’s shop. Onthe ground-floor are three Ionic columns and on the first floor asemicircular gallery, while the dome that crowns it is occupied by aGallic cock, resting one foot upon the “Charte” and holding in the otherthe scales of Justice.
But that which most attracts the eye is opposite the Lion d’Or inn, thechemist’s shop of Monsieur Homais. In the evening especially its argandlamp is lit up and the red and green jars that embellish his shop-frontthrow far across the street their two streams of colour; then acrossthem as if in Bengal lights is seen the shadow of the chemistleaning over his desk. His house from top to bottom is placarded withinscriptions written in large hand, round hand, printed hand: “Vichy,Seltzer, Barege waters, blood purifiers, Raspail patent medicine,Arabian racahout, Darcet lozenges, Regnault paste, trusses, baths,hygienic chocolate,” etc. And the signboard, which takes up all thebreadth of the shop, bears in gold letters, “Homais, Chemist.” Then atthe back of the shop, behind the great scales fixed to the counter, theword “Laboratory” appears on a scroll above a glass door, which abouthalf-way up once more repeats “Homais” in gold letters on a blackground.
Beyond this there is nothing to see at Yonville. The street (the onlyone) a gunshot in length and flanked by a few shops on either side stopsshort at the turn of the highroad. If it is left on the right hand andthe foot of the Saint-Jean hills followed the cemetery is soon reached.
At the time of the cholera, in order to enlarge this, a piece of wallwas pulled down, and three acres of land by its side purchased; but allthe new portion is almost tenantless; the tombs, as heretofore,continue to crowd together towards the gate. The keeper, who is at oncegravedigger and church beadle (thus making a double profit out of theparish corpses), has taken advantage of the unused plot of ground toplant potatoes there. From year to year, however, his small field growssmaller, and when there is an epidemic, he does not know whether torejoice at the deaths or regret the burials.
“You live on the dead, Lestiboudois!” the curé at last said to him oneday. This grim remark made him reflect; it checked him for some time;but to this day he carries on the cultivation of his little tubers, andeven maintains stoutly that they grow naturally.
Since the events about to be narrated, nothing in fact has changedat Yonville. The tin tricolour flag still swings at the top of thechurch-steeple; the two chintz streamers still flutter in the wind fromthe linen-draper’s; the chemist’s fetuses, like lumps of white amadou,rot more and more in their turbid alcohol, and above the big door ofthe inn the old golden lion, faded by rain, still shows passers-by itspoodle mane.
On the evening when the Bovarys were to arrive at Yonville, WidowLefrancois, the landlady of this inn, was so very busy that she sweatedgreat drops as she moved her saucepans. To-morrow was market-day. Themeat had to be cut beforehand, the fowls drawn, the soup and coffeemade. Moreover, she had the boarders’ meal to see to, and that of thedoctor, his wife, and their servant; the billiard-room was echoing withbursts of laughter; three millers in a small parlour were calling forbrandy; the wood was blazing, the brazen pan was hissing, and on thelong kitchen table, amid the quarters of raw mutton, rose piles ofplates that rattled with the shaking of the block on which spinach wasbeing chopped.
From the poultry-yard was heard the screaming of the fowls whom theservant was chasing in order to wring their necks.
A man slightly marked with small-pox, in green leather slippers, andwearing a velvet cap with a gold tassel, was warming his back at thechimney. His face expressed nothing but self-satisfaction, and heappeared to take life as calmly as the goldfinch suspended over his headin its wicker cage: this was the chemist.
“Artémise!” shouted the landlady, “chop some wood, fill the waterbottles, bring some brandy, look sharp! If only I knew what dessert tooffer the guests you are expecting! Good heavens! Those furniture-moversare beginning their racket in the billiard-room again; and their van hasbeen left before the front door! The ‘Hirondelle’ might run into it whenit draws up. Call Polyte and tell him to put it up. Only think, MonsieurHomais, that since morning they have had about fifteen games, and drunkeight jars of cider! Why, they’ll tear my cloth for me,” she went on,looking at them from a distance, her strainer in her hand.
“That wouldn’t be much of a loss,” replied Monsieur Homais. “You wouldbuy another.”
“Another billiard-table!” exclaimed the widow.
“Since that one is coming to pieces, Madame Lefrancois. I tell you againyou are doing yourself harm, much harm! And besides, players now wantnarrow pockets and heavy cues. Hazards aren’t played now; everything ischanged! One must keep pace with the times! Just look at Tellier!”
The hostess reddened with vexation. The chemist went on--
“You may say what you like; his table is better than yours; and if onewere to think, for example, of getting up a patriotic pool for Poland orthe sufferers from the Lyons floods--”
“It isn’t beggars like him that’ll frighten us,” interrupted thelandlady, shrugging her fat shoulders. “Come, come, Monsieur Homais; aslong as the ‘Lion d’Or’ exists people will come to it. We’ve featheredour nest; while one of these days you’ll find the ‘Cafe Francais’ closedwith a big placard on the shutters. Change my billiard-table!” she wenton, speaking to herself, “the table that comes in so handy for foldingthe washing, and on which, in the hunting season, I have slept sixvisitors! But that dawdler, Hivert, doesn’t come!”
“Are you waiting for him for your gentlemen’s dinner?”
“Wait for him! And what about Monsieur Binet? As the clock strikessix you’ll see him come in, for he hasn’t his equal under the sun forpunctuality. He must always have his seat in the small parlour. He’drather die than dine anywhere else. And so squeamish as he is, and soparticular about the cider! Not like Monsieur Léon; he sometimes comesat seven, or even half-past, and he doesn’t so much as look at what heeats. Such a nice young man! Never speaks a rough word!”
“Well, you see, there’s a great difference between an educated man andan old carabineer who is now a tax-collector.”
Six o’clock struck. Binet came in.
He wore a blue frock-coat falling in a straight line round his thinbody, and his leather cap, with its lappets knotted over the top ofhis head with string, showed under the turned-up peak a bald forehead,flattened by the constant wearing of a helmet. He wore a black clothwaistcoat, a hair collar, grey trousers, and, all the year round,well-blacked boots, that had two parallel swellings due to the stickingout of his big-toes. Not a hair stood out from the regular line of fairwhiskers, which, encircling his jaws, framed, after the fashion of agarden border, his long, wan face, whose eyes were small and the nosehooked. Clever at all games of cards, a good hunter, and writing afine hand, he had at home a lathe, and amused himself by turning napkinrings, with which he filled up his house, with the jealousy of an artistand the egotism of a bourgeois.
He went to the small parlour, but the three millers had to be got outfirst, and during the whole time necessary for laying the cloth, Binetremained silent in his place near the stove. Then he shut the door andtook off his cap in his usual way.
“It isn’t with saying civil things that he’ll wear out his tongue,” saidthe chemist, as soon as he was along with the landlady.
“He never talks more,” she replied. “Last week two travelers in thecloth line were here--such clever chaps who told such jokes in theevening, that I fairly cried with laughing; and he stood there like adab fish and never said a word.”
“Yes,” observed the chemist; “no imagination, no sallies, nothing thatmakes the society-man.”
“Yet they say he has parts,” objected the landlady.
“Parts!” replied Monsieur Homais; “he, parts! In his own line it ispossible,” he added in a calmer tone. And he went on--
“Ah! That a merchant, who has large connections, a jurisconsult, adoctor, a chemist, should be thus absent-minded, that they should becomewhimsical or even peevish, I can understand; such cases are cited inhistory. But at least it is because they are thinking of something.Myself, for example, how often has it happened to me to look on thebureau for my pen to write a label, and to find, after all, that I hadput it behind my ear!”
Madame Lefrancois just then went to the door to see if the “Hirondelle” were not coming. She started. A man dressed in black suddenly came intothe kitchen. By the last gleam of the twilight one could see that hisface was rubicund and his form athletic.
“What can I do for you, Monsieur le Curé?” asked the landlady, as shereached down from the chimney one of the copper candlesticks placedwith their candles in a row. “Will you take something? A thimbleful of_Cassis?_[10] A glass of wine?”
[10] Black currant liqueur.
The priest declined very politely. He had come for his umbrella, thathe had forgotten the other day at the Ernemont convent, and afterasking Madame Lefrancois to have it sent to him at the presbytery in theevening, he left for the church, from which the Angelus was ringing.
When the chemist no longer heard the noise of his boots along thesquare, he thought the priest’s behaviour just now very unbecoming. Thisrefusal to take any refreshment seemed to him the most odious hypocrisy;all priests tippled on the sly, and were trying to bring back the daysof the tithe.
The landlady took up the defence of her curé.
“Besides, he could double up four men like you over his knee. Last yearhe helped our people to bring in the straw; he carried as many as sixtrusses at once, he is so strong.”
“Bravo!” said the chemist. “Now just send your daughters to confess tofellows which such a temperament! I, if I were the Government, I’d havethe priests bled once a month. Yes, Madame Lefrancois, every month--agood phlebotomy, in the interests of the police and morals.”
“Be quiet, Monsieur Homais. You are an infidel; you’ve no religion.”
The chemist answered: “I have a religion, my religion, and I even havemore than all these others with their mummeries and their juggling.I adore God, on the contrary. I believe in the Supreme Being, in aCreator, whatever he may be. I care little who has placed us here belowto fulfil our duties as citizens and fathers of families; but I don’tneed to go to church to kiss silver plates, and fatten, out of mypocket, a lot of good-for-nothings who live better than we do. For onecan know Him as well in a wood, in a field, or even contemplating theeternal vault like the ancients. My God! Mine is the God of Socrates, ofFranklin, of Voltaire, and of Beranger! I am for the profession of faithof the ‘Savoyard Vicar,’ and the immortal principles of ‘89! And I can’tadmit of an old boy of a God who takes walks in his garden with acane in his hand, who lodges his friends in the belly of whales, diesuttering a cry, and rises again at the end of three days; things absurdin themselves, and completely opposed, moreover, to all physical laws,which prove to us, by the way, that priests have always wallowed inturpid ignorance, in which they would fain engulf the people with them.”
He ceased, looking round for an audience, for in his bubbling overthe chemist had for a moment fancied himself in the midst of the towncouncil. But the landlady no longer heeded him; she was listening to adistant rolling. One could distinguish the noise of a carriage mingledwith the clattering of loose horseshoes that beat against the ground,and at last the “Hirondelle” stopped at the door.
It was a yellow box on two large wheels, that, reaching to the tilt,prevented travelers from seeing the road and dirtied their shoulders.The small panes of the narrow windows rattled in their sashes when thecoach was closed, and retained here and there patches of mud amid theold layers of dust, that not even storms of rain had altogether washedaway. It was drawn by three horses, the first a leader, and when it camedown-hill its bottom jolted against the ground.
Some of the inhabitants of Yonville came out into the square; they allspoke at once, asking for news, for explanations, for hampers. Hivertdid not know whom to answer. It was he who did the errands of the placein town. He went to the shops and brought back rolls of leather forthe shoemaker, old iron for the farrier, a barrel of herrings for hismistress, caps from the milliner’s, locks from the hair-dresser’s andall along the road on his return journey he distributed his parcels,which he threw, standing upright on his seat and shouting at the top ofhis voice, over the enclosures of the yards.
An accident had delayed him. Madame Bovary’s greyhound had run acrossthe field. They had whistled for him a quarter of an hour; Hivert hadeven gone back a mile and a half expecting every moment to catch sightof her; but it had been necessary to go on.
Emma had wept, grown angry; she had accused Charles of this misfortune.Monsieur Lheureux, a draper, who happened to be in the coach withher, had tried to console her by a number of examples of lost dogsrecognizing their masters at the end of long years. One, he said hadbeen told of, who had come back to Paris from Constantinople. Anotherhad gone one hundred and fifty miles in a straight line, and swum fourrivers; and his own father had possessed a poodle, which, after twelveyears of absence, had all of a sudden jumped on his back in the streetas he was going to dine in town.
Chapter Two
Emma got out first, then Félicité, Monsieur Lheureux, and a nurse, andthey had to wake up Charles in his corner, where he had slept soundlysince night set in.
Homais introduced himself; he offered his homages to madame and hisrespects to monsieur; said he was charmed to have been able to renderthem some slight service, and added with a cordial air that he hadventured to invite himself, his wife being away.
When Madame Bovary was in the kitchen she went up to the chimney.
With the tips of her fingers she caught her dress at the knee, andhaving thus pulled it up to her ankle, held out her foot in its blackboot to the fire above the revolving leg of mutton. The flame lit up thewhole of her, penetrating with a crude light the woof of her gowns, thefine pores of her fair skin, and even her eyelids, which she blinked nowand again. A great red glow passed over her with the blowing of the windthrough the half-open door.
On the other side of the chimney a young man with fair hair watched hersilently.
As he was a good deal bored at Yonville, where he was a clerk at thenotary’s, Monsieur Guillaumin, Monsieur Léon Dupuis (it was he whowas the second habitue of the “Lion d’Or”) frequently put back hisdinner-hour in hope that some traveler might come to the inn, with whomhe could chat in the evening. On the days when his work was done early,he had, for want of something else to do, to come punctually, and endurefrom soup to cheese a _tête-à-tête_ with Binet. It was therefore withdelight that he accepted the landlady’s suggestion that he should dinein company with the newcomers, and they passed into the large parlourwhere Madame Lefrancois, for the purpose of showing off, had had thetable laid for four.
Homais asked to be allowed to keep on his skull-cap, for fear of coryza;then, turning to his neighbour--
“Madame is no doubt a little fatigued; one gets jolted so abominably inour ‘Hirondelle.’”
“That is true,” replied Emma; “but moving about always amuses me. I likechange of place.”
“It is so tedious,” sighed the clerk, “to be always riveted to the sameplaces.”
“If you were like me,” said Charles, “constantly obliged to be in thesaddle”--
“But,” Léon went on, addressing himself to Madame Bovary, “nothing, itseems to me, is more pleasant--when one can,” he added.
“Moreover,” said the druggist, “the practice of medicine is not veryhard work in our part of the world, for the state of our roads allows usthe use of gigs, and generally, as the farmers are prosperous, they paypretty well. We have, medically speaking, besides the ordinary casesof enteritis, bronchitis, bilious affections, etc., now and then afew intermittent fevers at harvest-time; but on the whole, little of aserious nature, nothing special to note, unless it be a great deal ofscrofula, due, no doubt, to the deplorable hygienic conditions of ourpeasant dwellings. Ah! you will find many prejudices to combat, MonsieurBovary, much obstinacy of routine, with which all the efforts of yourscience will daily come into collision; for people still have recourseto novenas, to relics, to the priest, rather than come straight to thedoctor or the chemist. The climate, however, is not, truth to tell, bad,and we even have a few nonagenarians in our parish. The thermometer (Ihave made some observations) falls in winter to 4 degrees Centigradeat the outside, which gives us 24 degrees Reaumur as the maximum, orotherwise 54 degrees Fahrenheit (English scale), not more. And, as amatter of fact, we are sheltered from the north winds by the forest ofArgueil on the one side, from the west winds by the St. Jean range onthe other; and this heat, moreover, which, on account of the aqueousvapours given off by the river and the considerable number of cattlein the fields, which, as you know, exhale much ammonia, that is to say,nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen (no, nitrogen and hydrogen alone), andwhich sucking up into itself the humus from the ground, mixing togetherall those different emanations, unites them into a stack, so to say,and combining with the electricity diffused through the atmosphere, whenthere is any, might in the long run, as in tropical countries, engenderinsalubrious miasmata--this heat, I say, finds itself perfectly temperedon the side whence it comes, or rather whence it should come--that is tosay, the southern side--by the south-eastern winds, which, having cooledthemselves passing over the Seine, reach us sometimes all at once likebreezes from Russia.”
“At any rate, you have some walks in the neighbourhood?” continuedMadame Bovary, speaking to the young man.
“Oh, very few,” he answered. “There is a place they call La Pâture, onthe top of the hill, on the edge of the forest. Sometimes, on Sundays, Igo and stay there with a book, watching the sunset.”
“I think there is nothing so admirable as sunsets,” she resumed; “butespecially by the side of the sea.”
“Oh, I adore the sea!” said Monsieur Léon.
“And then, does it not seem to you,” continued Madame Bovary, “that themind travels more freely on this limitless expanse, the contemplation ofwhich elevates the soul, gives ideas of the infinite, the ideal?”
“It is the same with mountainous landscapes,” continued Léon. “A cousinof mine who travelled in Switzerland last year told me that one couldnot picture to oneself the poetry of the lakes, the charm of thewaterfalls, the gigantic effect of the glaciers. One sees pines ofincredible size across torrents, cottages suspended over precipices,and, a thousand feet below one, whole valleys when the clouds open. Suchspectacles must stir to enthusiasm, incline to prayer, to ecstasy; and Ino longer marvel at that celebrated musician who, the better to inspirehis imagination, was in the habit of playing the piano before someimposing site.”
“You play?” she asked.
“No, but I am very fond of music,” he replied.
“Ah! don’t you listen to him, Madame Bovary,” interrupted Homais,bending over his plate. “That’s sheer modesty. Why, my dear fellow, theother day in your room you were singing ‘L’Ange Gardien’ ravishingly. Iheard you from the laboratory. You gave it like an actor.”
Léon, in fact, lodged at the chemist’s where he had a small room on thesecond floor, overlooking the Place. He blushed at the compliment of hislandlord, who had already turned to the doctor, and was enumerating tohim, one after the other, all the principal inhabitants of Yonville. Hewas telling anecdotes, giving information; the fortune of the notarywas not known exactly, and “there was the Tuvache household,” who made agood deal of show.
Emma continued, “And what music do you prefer?”
“Oh, German music; that which makes you dream.”
“Have you been to the opera?”
“Not yet; but I shall go next year, when I am living at Paris to finishreading for the bar.”
“As I had the honour of putting it to your husband,” said the chemist,“with regard to this poor Yanoda who has run away, you will findyourself, thanks to his extravagance, in the possession of one of themost comfortable houses of Yonville. Its greatest convenience for adoctor is a door giving on the Walk, where one can go in and out unseen.Moreover, it contains everything that is agreeable in a household--alaundry, kitchen with offices, sitting-room, fruit-room, and so on. Hewas a gay dog, who didn’t care what he spent. At the end of the garden,by the side of the water, he had an arbour built just for the purpose ofdrinking beer in summer; and if madame is fond of gardening she will beable--”
“My wife doesn’t care about it,” said Charles; “although she hasbeen advised to take exercise, she prefers always sitting in her roomreading.”
“Like me,” replied Léon. “And indeed, what is better than to sit byone’s fireside in the evening with a book, while the wind beats againstthe window and the lamp is burning?”
“What, indeed?” she said, fixing her large black eyes wide open uponhim.
“One thinks of nothing,” he continued; “the hours slip by. Motionless wetraverse countries we fancy we see, and your thought, blending withthe fiction, playing with the details, follows the outline of theadventures. It mingles with the characters, and it seems as if it wereyourself palpitating beneath their costumes.”
“That is true! That is true?” she said.
“Has it ever happened to you,” Léon went on, “to come across some vagueidea of one’s own in a book, some dim image that comes back to you fromafar, and as the completest expression of your own slightest sentiment?”
“I have experienced it,” she replied.
“That is why,” he said, “I especially love the poets. I think verse moretender than prose, and that it moves far more easily to tears.”
“Still in the long run it is tiring,” continued Emma. “Now I, on thecontrary, adore stories that rush breathlessly along, that frighten one.I detest commonplace heroes and moderate sentiments, such as there arein nature.”
“In fact,” observed the clerk, “these works, not touching the heart,miss, it seems to me, the true end of art. It is so sweet, amid allthe disenchantments of life, to be able to dwell in thought upon noblecharacters, pure affections, and pictures of happiness. For myself,living here far from the world, this is my one distraction; but Yonvilleaffords so few resources.”
“Like Tostes, no doubt,” replied Emma; “and so I always subscribed to alending library.”
“If madame will do me the honour of making use of it”, said the chemist,who had just caught the last words, “I have at her disposal a librarycomposed of the best authors, Voltaire, Rousseau, Delille, WalterScott, the ‘Echo des Feuilletons’; and in addition I receive variousperiodicals, among them the ‘Fanal de Rouen’ daily, having the advantageto be its correspondent for the districts of Buchy, Forges, Neufchâtel,Yonville, and vicinity.”
For two hours and a half they had been at table; for the servantArtémis, carelessly dragging her old list slippers over the flags,brought one plate after the other, forgot everything, and constantlyleft the door of the billiard-room half open, so that it beat againstthe wall with its hooks.
Unconsciously, Léon, while talking, had placed his foot on one of thebars of the chair on which Madame Bovary was sitting. She wore a smallblue silk necktie, that kept up like a ruff a gauffered cambric collar,and with the movements of her head the lower part of her face gentlysunk into the linen or came out from it. Thus side by side, whileCharles and the chemist chatted, they entered into one of those vagueconversations where the hazard of all that is said brings you back tothe fixed centre of a common sympathy. The Paris theatres, titles ofnovels, new quadrilles, and the world they did not know; Tostes, whereshe had lived, and Yonville, where they were; they examined all, talkedof everything till to the end of dinner.
When coffee was served Félicité went away to get ready the room in thenew house, and the guests soon raised the siege. Madame Lefrancois wasasleep near the cinders, while the stable-boy, lantern in hand, waswaiting to show Monsieur and Madame Bovary the way home. Bits of strawstuck in his red hair, and he limped with his left leg. When he hadtaken in his other hand the cure’s umbrella, they started.
The town was asleep; the pillars of the market threw great shadows; theearth was all grey as on a summer’s night. But as the doctor’s house wasonly some fifty paces from the inn, they had to say good-night almostimmediately, and the company dispersed.
As soon as she entered the passage, Emma felt the cold of the plasterfall about her shoulders like damp linen. The walls were new and thewooden stairs creaked. In their bedroom, on the first floor, a whitishlight passed through the curtainless windows.
She could catch glimpses of tree tops, and beyond, the fields,half-drowned in the fog that lay reeking in the moonlight alongthe course of the river. In the middle of the room, pell-mell, werescattered drawers, bottles, curtain-rods, gilt poles, with mattresseson the chairs and basins on the ground--the two men who had brought thefurniture had left everything about carelessly.
This was the fourth time that she had slept in a strange place.
The first was the day of her going to the convent; the second, of herarrival at Tostes; the third, at Vaubyessard; and this was the fourth.And each one had marked, as it were, the inauguration of a new phase inher life. She did not believe that things could present themselves inthe same way in different places, and since the portion of her lifelived had been bad, no doubt that which remained to be lived would bebetter.
Chapter Three
The next day, as she was getting up, she saw the clerk on the Place. Shehad on a dressing-gown. He looked up and bowed. She nodded quickly andreclosed the window.
Léon waited all day for six o’clock in the evening to come, but on goingto the inn, he found no one but Monsieur Binet, already at table. Thedinner of the evening before had been a considerable event for him; hehad never till then talked for two hours consecutively to a “lady.” Howthen had he been able to explain, and in such language, the number ofthings that he could not have said so well before? He was usuallyshy, and maintained that reserve which partakes at once of modesty anddissimulation.
At Yonville he was considered “well-bred.” He listened to the argumentsof the older people, and did not seem hot about politics--a remarkablething for a young man. Then he had some accomplishments; he painted inwater-colours, could read the key of G, and readily talked literatureafter dinner when he did not play cards. Monsieur Homais respected himfor his education; Madame Homais liked him for his good-nature, forhe often took the little Homais into the garden--little brats who werealways dirty, very much spoilt, and somewhat lymphatic, like theirmother. Besides the servant to look after them, they had Justin, thechemist’s apprentice, a second cousin of Monsieur Homais, who had beentaken into the house from charity, and who was useful at the same timeas a servant.
The druggist proved the best of neighbours. He gave Madame Bovaryinformation as to the trades-people, sent expressly for his own cidermerchant, tasted the drink himself, and saw that the casks were properlyplaced in the cellar; he explained how to set about getting in asupply of butter cheap, and made an arrangement with Lestiboudois, thesacristan, who, besides his sacerdotal and funeral functions, lookedafter the principal gardens at Yonville by the hour or the year,according to the taste of the customers.
The need of looking after others was not the only thing that urged thechemist to such obsequious cordiality; there was a plan underneath itall.
He had infringed the law of the 19th Ventose, year xi., article I, whichforbade all persons not having a diploma to practise medicine; so that,after certain anonymous denunciations, Homais had been summoned to Rouento see the procurer of the king in his own private room; the magistratereceiving him standing up, ermine on shoulder and cap on head. It wasin the morning, before the court opened. In the corridors one heardthe heavy boots of the gendarmes walking past, and like a far-off noisegreat locks that were shut. The druggist’s ears tingled as if he wereabout to have an apoplectic stroke; he saw the depths of dungeons,his family in tears, his shop sold, all the jars dispersed; and he wasobliged to enter a cafe and take a glass of rum and seltzer to recoverhis spirits.
Little by little the memory of this reprimand grew fainter, andhe continued, as heretofore, to give anodyne consultations in hisback-parlour. But the mayor resented it, his colleagues were jealous,everything was to be feared; gaining over Monsieur Bovary by hisattentions was to earn his gratitude, and prevent his speaking out lateron, should he notice anything. So every morning Homais brought him “thepaper,” and often in the afternoon left his shop for a few moments tohave a chat with the Doctor.
Charles was dull: patients did not come. He remained seated for hourswithout speaking, went into his consulting room to sleep, or watchedhis wife sewing. Then for diversion he employed himself at home as aworkman; he even tried to do up the attic with some paint which had beenleft behind by the painters. But money matters worried him. He hadspent so much for repairs at Tostes, for madame’s toilette, and for themoving, that the whole dowry, over three thousand crowns, had slippedaway in two years.
Then how many things had been spoilt or lost during their carriage fromTostes to Yonville, without counting the plaster cure, who falling outof the coach at an over-severe jolt, had been dashed into a thousandfragments on the pavements of Quincampoix! A pleasanter trouble cameto distract him, namely, the pregnancy of his wife. As the time of herconfinement approached he cherished her the more. It was another bond ofthe flesh establishing itself, and, as it were, a continued sentimentof a more complex union. When from afar he saw her languid walk, andher figure without stays turning softly on her hips; when opposite oneanother he looked at her at his ease, while she took tired poses in herarmchair, then his happiness knew no bounds; he got up, embraced her,passed his hands over her face, called her little mamma, wanted tomake her dance, and half-laughing, half-crying, uttered all kinds ofcaressing pleasantries that came into his head. The idea of havingbegotten a child delighted him. Now he wanted nothing. He knew humanlife from end to end, and he sat down to it with serenity.
Emma at first felt a great astonishment; then was anxious to bedelivered that she might know what it was to be a mother. But notbeing able to spend as much as she would have liked, to have aswing-bassinette with rose silk curtains, and embroidered caps, in a fitof bitterness she gave up looking after the trousseau, and ordered thewhole of it from a village needlewoman, without choosing or discussinganything. Thus she did not amuse herself with those preparations thatstimulate the tenderness of mothers, and so her affection was from thevery outset, perhaps, to some extent attenuated.
As Charles, however, spoke of the boy at every meal, she soon began tothink of him more consecutively.
She hoped for a son; he would be strong and dark; she would call himGeorge; and this idea of having a male child was like an expectedrevenge for all her impotence in the past. A man, at least, is free; hemay travel over passions and over countries, overcome obstacles, tasteof the most far-away pleasures. But a woman is always hampered. At onceinert and flexible, she has against her the weakness of the flesh andlegal dependence. Her will, like the veil of her bonnet, held by astring, flutters in every wind; there is always some desire that drawsher, some conventionality that restrains.
She was confined on a Sunday at about six o’clock, as the sun wasrising.
“It is a girl!” said Charles.
She turned her head away and fainted.
Madame Homais, as well as Madame Lefrancois of the Lion d’Or, almostimmediately came running in to embrace her. The chemist, as man ofdiscretion, only offered a few provincial felicitations through thehalf-opened door. He wished to see the child and thought it well made.
Whilst she was getting well she occupied herself much in seeking aname for her daughter. First she went over all those that have Italianendings, such as Clara, Louisa, Amanda, Atala; she liked Galsuindepretty well, and Yseult or Leocadie still better.
Charles wanted the child to be called after her mother; Emma opposedthis. They ran over the calendar from end to end, and then consultedoutsiders.
“Monsieur Léon,” said the chemist, “with whom I was talking about itthe other day, wonders you do not chose Madeleine. It is very much infashion just now.”
But Madame Bovary, senior, cried out loudly against this name of asinner. As to Monsieur Homais, he had a preference for all those thatrecalled some great man, an illustrious fact, or a generous idea, and itwas on this system that he had baptized his four children. Thus Napoleonrepresented glory and Franklin liberty; Irma was perhaps a concession toromanticism, but Athalie was a homage to the greatest masterpiece of theFrench stage. For his philosophical convictions did not interferewith his artistic tastes; in him the thinker did not stifle the man ofsentiment; he could make distinctions, make allowances for imaginationand fanaticism. In this tragedy, for example, he found fault with theideas, but admired the style; he detested the conception, but applaudedall the details, and loathed the characters while he grew enthusiasticover their dialogue. When he read the fine passages he was transported,but when he thought that mummers would get something out of them fortheir show, he was disconsolate; and in this confusion of sentiments inwhich he was involved he would have liked at once to crown Racine withboth his hands and discuss with him for a good quarter of an hour.
At last Emma remembered that at the château of Vaubyessard she had heardthe Marchioness call a young lady Berthe; from that moment this name waschosen; and as old Rouault could not come, Monsieur Homais was requestedto stand godfather. His gifts were all products from his establishment,to wit: six boxes of jujubes, a whole jar of racahout, three cakes ofmarshmallow paste, and six sticks of sugar-candy into the bargain thathe had come across in a cupboard. On the evening of the ceremony therewas a grand dinner; the cure was present; there was much excitement.Monsieur Homais towards liqueur-time began singing “Le Dieu des bonnesgens.” Monsieur Léon sang a barcarolle, and Madame Bovary, senior, whowas godmother, a romance of the time of the Empire; finally, M. Bovary,senior, insisted on having the child brought down, and began baptizingit with a glass of champagne that he poured over its head. This mockeryof the first of the sacraments made the Abbe Bournisien angry; oldBovary replied by a quotation from “La Guerre des Dieux”; the curewanted to leave; the ladies implored, Homais interfered; and theysucceeded in making the priest sit down again, and he quietly went onwith the half-finished coffee in his saucer.
Monsieur Bovary, senior, stayed at Yonville a month, dazzling thenatives by a superb policeman’s cap with silver tassels that he worein the morning when he smoked his pipe in the square. Being also in thehabit of drinking a good deal of brandy, he often sent the servantto the Lion d’Or to buy him a bottle, which was put down to hisson’s account, and to perfume his handkerchiefs he used up hisdaughter-in-law’s whole supply of eau-de-cologne.
The latter did not at all dislike his company. He had knocked about theworld, he talked about Berlin, Vienna, and Strasbourg, of his soldiertimes, of the mistresses he had had, the grand luncheons of which he hadpartaken; then he was amiable, and sometimes even, either on the stairs,or in the garden, would seize hold of her waist, crying, “Charles, lookout for yourself.”
Then Madame Bovary, senior, became alarmed for her son’s happiness, andfearing that her husband might in the long-run have an immoral influenceupon the ideas of the young woman, took care to hurry their departure.Perhaps she had more serious reasons for uneasiness. Monsieur Bovary wasnot the man to respect anything.
One day Emma was suddenly seized with the desire to see her littlegirl, who had been put to nurse with the carpenter’s wife, and, withoutlooking at the calendar to see whether the six weeks of the Virgin wereyet passed, she set out for the Rollets’ house, situated at the extremeend of the village, between the highroad and the fields.
It was mid-day, the shutters of the houses were closed and the slateroofs that glittered beneath the fierce light of the blue sky seemed tostrike sparks from the crest of the gables. A heavy wind was blowing;Emma felt weak as she walked; the stones of the pavement hurt her; shewas doubtful whether she would not go home again, or go in somewhere torest.
At this moment Monsieur Léon came out from a neighbouring door with abundle of papers under his arm. He came to greet her, and stood in theshade in front of the Lheureux’s shop under the projecting grey awning.
Madame Bovary said she was going to see her baby, but that she wasbeginning to grow tired.
“If--” said Léon, not daring to go on.
“Have you any business to attend to?” she asked.
And on the clerk’s answer, she begged him to accompany her. That sameevening this was known in Yonville, and Madame Tuvache, the mayor’swife, declared in the presence of her servant that “Madame Bovary wascompromising herself.”
To get to the nurse’s it was necessary to turn to the left on leavingthe street, as if making for the cemetery, and to follow between littlehouses and yards a small path bordered with privet hedges. They werein bloom, and so were the speedwells, eglantines, thistles, and thesweetbriar that sprang up from the thickets. Through openings inthe hedges one could see into the huts, some pigs on a dung-heap, ortethered cows rubbing their horns against the trunk of trees. The two,side by side walked slowly, she leaning upon him, and he restraininghis pace, which he regulated by hers; in front of them a swarm of midgesfluttered, buzzing in the warm air.
They recognized the house by an old walnut-tree which shaded it.
Low and covered with brown tiles, there hung outside it, beneath thedormer-window of the garret, a string of onions. Faggots uprightagainst a thorn fence surrounded a bed of lettuce, a few square feet oflavender, and sweet peas strung on sticks. Dirty water was running hereand there on the grass, and all round were several indefinite rags,knitted stockings, a red calico jacket, and a large sheet of coarselinen spread over the hedge. At the noise of the gate the nurse appearedwith a baby she was suckling on one arm. With her other hand she waspulling along a poor puny little fellow, his face covered with scrofula,the son of a Rouen hosier, whom his parents, too taken up with theirbusiness, left in the country.
“Go in,” she said; “your little one is there asleep.”
The room on the ground-floor, the only one in the dwelling, had at itsfarther end, against the wall, a large bed without curtains, while akneading-trough took up the side by the window, one pane of whichwas mended with a piece of blue paper. In the corner behind the door,shining hob-nailed shoes stood in a row under the slab of the washstand,near a bottle of oil with a feather stuck in its mouth; a MatthieuLaensberg lay on the dusty mantelpiece amid gunflints, candle-ends, andbits of amadou.
Finally, the last luxury in the apartment was a “Fame” blowing hertrumpets, a picture cut out, no doubt, from some perfumer’s prospectusand nailed to the wall with six wooden shoe-pegs.
Emma’s child was asleep in a wicker-cradle. She took it up in thewrapping that enveloped it and began singing softly as she rockedherself to and fro.
Léon walked up and down the room; it seemed strange to him to see thisbeautiful woman in her nankeen dress in the midst of all this poverty.Madam Bovary reddened; he turned away, thinking perhaps there had beenan impertinent look in his eyes. Then she put back the little girl, whohad just been sick over her collar.
The nurse at once came to dry her, protesting that it wouldn’t show.
“She gives me other doses,” she said: “I am always a-washing of her. Ifyou would have the goodness to order Camus, the grocer, to let me havea little soap, it would really be more convenient for you, as I needn’ttrouble you then.”
“Very well! very well!” said Emma. “Good morning, Madame Rollet,” andshe went out, wiping her shoes at the door.
The good woman accompanied her to the end of the garden, talking all thetime of the trouble she had getting up of nights.
“I’m that worn out sometimes as I drop asleep on my chair. I’m sure youmight at least give me just a pound of ground coffee; that’d last me amonth, and I’d take it of a morning with some milk.”
After having submitted to her thanks, Madam Bovary left. She had gone alittle way down the path when, at the sound of wooden shoes, she turnedround. It was the nurse.
“What is it?”
Then the peasant woman, taking her aside behind an elm tree, begantalking to her of her husband, who with his trade and six francs a yearthat the captain--
“Oh, be quick!” said Emma.
“Well,” the nurse went on, heaving sighs between each word, “I’m afraidhe’ll be put out seeing me have coffee alone, you know men--”
“But you are to have some,” Emma repeated; “I will give you some. Youbother me!”
“Oh, dear! my poor, dear lady! you see in consequence of his wounds hehas terrible cramps in the chest. He even says that cider weakens him.”
“Do make haste, Mere Rollet!”
“Well,” the latter continued, making a curtsey, “if it weren’t askingtoo much,” and she curtsied once more, “if you would”--and her eyesbegged--“a jar of brandy,” she said at last, “and I’d rub your littleone’s feet with it; they’re as tender as one’s tongue.”
Once rid of the nurse, Emma again took Monsieur Léon’s arm. She walkedfast for some time, then more slowly, and looking straight in front ofher, her eyes rested on the shoulder of the young man, whose frock-coathad a black-velvety collar. His brown hair fell over it, straight andcarefully arranged. She noticed his nails which were longer than onewore them at Yonville. It was one of the clerk’s chief occupations totrim them, and for this purpose he kept a special knife in his writingdesk.
They returned to Yonville by the water-side. In the warm season thebank, wider than at other times, showed to their foot the garden wallswhence a few steps led to the river. It flowed noiselessly, swift,and cold to the eye; long, thin grasses huddled together in it as thecurrent drove them, and spread themselves upon the limpid water likestreaming hair; sometimes at the tip of the reeds or on the leaf of awater-lily an insect with fine legs crawled or rested. The sun piercedwith a ray the small blue bubbles of the waves that, breaking, followedeach other; branchless old willows mirrored their grey backs inthe water; beyond, all around, the meadows seemed empty. It was thedinner-hour at the farms, and the young woman and her companion heardnothing as they walked but the fall of their steps on the earth of thepath, the words they spoke, and the sound of Emma’s dress rustling roundher.
The walls of the gardens with pieces of bottle on their coping werehot as the glass windows of a conservatory. Wallflowers had sprung upbetween the bricks, and with the tip of her open sunshade Madame Bovary,as she passed, made some of their faded flowers crumble into a yellowdust, or a spray of overhanging honeysuckle and clematis caught in itsfringe and dangled for a moment over the silk.
They were talking of a troupe of Spanish dancers who were expectedshortly at the Rouen theatre.
“Are you going?” she asked.
“If I can,” he answered.
Had they nothing else to say to one another? Yet their eyes were fullof more serious speech, and while they forced themselves to find trivialphrases, they felt the same languor stealing over them both. It was thewhisper of the soul, deep, continuous, dominating that of their voices.Surprised with wonder at this strange sweetness, they did not think ofspeaking of the sensation or of seeking its cause. Coming joys, liketropical shores, throw over the immensity before them their inbornsoftness, an odorous wind, and we are lulled by this intoxicationwithout a thought of the horizon that we do not even know.
In one place the ground had been trodden down by the cattle; they had tostep on large green stones put here and there in the mud.
She often stopped a moment to look where to place her foot, andtottering on a stone that shook, her arms outspread, her form bentforward with a look of indecision, she would laugh, afraid of fallinginto the puddles of water.
When they arrived in front of her garden, Madame Bovary opened thelittle gate, ran up the steps and disappeared.
Léon returned to his office. His chief was away; he just glanced at thebriefs, then cut himself a pen, and at last took up his hat and wentout.
He went to La Pâture at the top of the Argueil hills at the beginning ofthe forest; he threw himself upon the ground under the pines and watchedthe sky through his fingers.
“How bored I am!” he said to himself, “how bored I am!”
He thought he was to be pitied for living in this village, with Homaisfor a friend and Monsieru Guillaumin for master. The latter, entirelyabsorbed by his business, wearing gold-rimmed spectacles and redwhiskers over a white cravat, understood nothing of mental refinements,although he affected a stiff English manner, which in the beginning hadimpressed the clerk.
As to the chemist’s spouse, she was the best wife in Normandy, gentleas a sheep, loving her children, her father, her mother, her cousins,weeping for other’s woes, letting everything go in her household, anddetesting corsets; but so slow of movement, such a bore to listen to, socommon in appearance, and of such restricted conversation, that althoughshe was thirty, he only twenty, although they slept in rooms next eachother and he spoke to her daily, he never thought that she might be awoman for another, or that she possessed anything else of her sex thanthe gown.
And what else was there? Binet, a few shopkeepers, two or threepublicans, the cure, and finally, Monsieur Tuvache, the mayor, with histwo sons, rich, crabbed, obtuse persons, who farmed their own landsand had feasts among themselves, bigoted to boot, and quite unbearablecompanions.
But from the general background of all these human faces Emma’s stoodout isolated and yet farthest off; for between her and him he seemed tosee a vague abyss.
In the beginning he had called on her several times along with thedruggist. Charles had not appeared particularly anxious to see himagain, and Léon did not know what to do between his fear of beingindiscreet and the desire for an intimacy that seemed almost impossible.
Chapter Four
When the first cold days set in Emma left her bedroom for thesitting-room, a long apartment with a low ceiling, in which there wason the mantelpiece a large bunch of coral spread out against thelooking-glass. Seated in her arm chair near the window, she could seethe villagers pass along the pavement.
Twice a day Léon went from his office to the Lion d’Or. Emma could hearhim coming from afar; she leant forward listening, and the young manglided past the curtain, always dressed in the same way, and withoutturning his head. But in the twilight, when, her chin resting on herleft hand, she let the embroidery she had begun fall on her knees, sheoften shuddered at the apparition of this shadow suddenly gliding past.She would get up and order the table to be laid.
Monsieur Homais called at dinner-time. Skull-cap in hand, he came in ontiptoe, in order to disturb no one, always repeating the same phrase,“Good evening, everybody.” Then, when he had taken his seat at the tablebetween the pair, he asked the doctor about his patients, and the latterconsulted his as to the probability of their payment. Next they talkedof “what was in the paper.”
Homais by this hour knew it almost by heart, and he repeated it from endto end, with the reflections of the penny-a-liners, and all the storiesof individual catastrophes that had occurred in France or abroad. Butthe subject becoming exhausted, he was not slow in throwing out someremarks on the dishes before him.
Sometimes even, half-rising, he delicately pointed out to madame thetenderest morsel, or turning to the servant, gave her some advice on themanipulation of stews and the hygiene of seasoning.
He talked aroma, osmazome, juices, and gelatine in a bewildering manner.Moreover, Homais, with his head fuller of recipes than his shop of jars,excelled in making all kinds of preserves, vinegars, and sweet liqueurs;he knew also all the latest inventions in economic stoves, together withthe art of preserving cheese and of curing sick wines.
At eight o’clock Justin came to fetch him to shut up the shop.
Then Monsieur Homais gave him a sly look, especially if Félicité wasthere, for he half noticed that his apprentice was fond of the doctor’shouse.
“The young dog,” he said, “is beginning to have ideas, and the deviltake me if I don’t believe he’s in love with your servant!”
But a more serious fault with which he reproached Justin was hisconstantly listening to conversation. On Sunday, for example, one couldnot get him out of the drawing-room, whither Madame Homais had calledhim to fetch the children, who were falling asleep in the arm-chairs,and dragging down with their backs calico chair-covers that were toolarge.
Not many people came to these soirees at the chemist’s, hisscandal-mongering and political opinions having successfully alienatedvarious respectable persons from him. The clerk never failed to bethere. As soon as he heard the bell he ran to meet Madame Bovary, tookher shawl, and put away under the shop-counter the thick list shoes thatshe wore over her boots when there was snow.
First they played some hands at trente-et-un; next Monsieur Homaisplayed ecarte with Emma; Léon behind her gave her advice.
Standing up with his hands on the back of her chair he saw the teeth ofher comb that bit into her chignon. With every movement that she madeto throw her cards the right side of her dress was drawn up. From herturned-up hair a dark colour fell over her back, and growing graduallypaler, lost itself little by little in the shade. Then her dress fellon both sides of her chair, puffing out full of folds, and reached theground. When Léon occasionally felt the sole of his boot resting on it,he drew back as if he had trodden upon some one.
When the game of cards was over, the druggist and the Doctor playeddominoes, and Emma, changing her place, leant her elbow on the table,turning over the leaves of “L’Illustration”. She had brought her ladies’journal with her. Léon sat down near her; they looked at the engravingstogether, and waited for one another at the bottom of the pages. Sheoften begged him to read her the verses; Léon declaimed them in alanguid voice, to which he carefully gave a dying fall in the lovepassages. But the noise of the dominoes annoyed him. Monsieur Homaiswas strong at the game; he could beat Charles and give him a double-six.Then the three hundred finished, they both stretched themselves out infront of the fire, and were soon asleep. The fire was dying out in thecinders; the teapot was empty, Léon was still reading.
Emma listened to him, mechanically turning around the lampshade, on thegauze of which were painted clowns in carriages, and tight-rope danceswith their balancing-poles. Léon stopped, pointing with a gesture to hissleeping audience; then they talked in low tones, and their conversationseemed the more sweet to them because it was unheard.
Thus a kind of bond was established between them, a constant commerceof books and of romances. Monsieur Bovary, little given to jealousy, didnot trouble himself about it.
On his birthday he received a beautiful phrenological head, all markedwith figures to the thorax and painted blue. This was an attention ofthe clerk’s. He showed him many others, even to doing errands for himat Rouen; and the book of a novelist having made the mania for cactusesfashionable, Léon bought some for Madame Bovary, bringing them back onhis knees in the “Hirondelle,” pricking his fingers on their hard hairs.
She had a board with a balustrade fixed against her window to hold thepots. The clerk, too, had his small hanging garden; they saw each othertending their flowers at their windows.
Of the windows of the village there was one yet more often occupied; foron Sundays from morning to night, and every morning when the weather wasbright, one could see at the dormer-window of the garret the profile ofMonsieur Binet bending over his lathe, whose monotonous humming could beheard at the Lion d’Or.
One evening on coming home Léon found in his room a rug in velvet andwool with leaves on a pale ground. He called Madame Homais, MonsieurHomais, Justin, the children, the cook; he spoke of it to his chief;every one wanted to see this rug. Why did the doctor’s wife give theclerk presents? It looked queer. They decided that she must be hislover.
He made this seem likely, so ceaselessly did he talk of her charms andof her wit; so much so, that Binet once roughly answered him--
“What does it matter to me since I’m not in her set?”
He tortured himself to find out how he could make his declaration toher, and always halting between the fear of displeasing her and theshame of being such a coward, he wept with discouragement and desire.Then he took energetic resolutions, wrote letters that he tore up, putit off to times that he again deferred.
Often he set out with the determination to dare all; but this resolutionsoon deserted him in Emma’s presence, and when Charles, dropping in,invited him to jump into his chaise to go with him to see some patientin the neighbourhood, he at once accepted, bowed to madame, and wentout. Her husband, was he not something belonging to her? As to Emma,she did not ask herself whether she loved. Love, she thought, must comesuddenly, with great outbursts and lightnings--a hurricane of the skies,which falls upon life, revolutionises it, roots up the will like a leaf,and sweeps the whole heart into the abyss. She did not know that onthe terrace of houses it makes lakes when the pipes are choked, and shewould thus have remained in her security when she suddenly discovered arent in the wall of it.
Chapter Five
It was a Sunday in February, an afternoon when the snow was falling.
They had all, Monsieur and Madame Bovary, Homais, and Monsieur Léon,gone to see a yarn-mill that was being built in the valley a mile and ahalf from Yonville. The druggist had taken Napoleon and Athalie to givethem some exercise, and Justin accompanied them, carrying the umbrellason his shoulder.
Nothing, however, could be less curious than this curiosity. A greatpiece of waste ground, on which pell-mell, amid a mass of sand andstones, were a few break-wheels, already rusty, surrounded by aquadrangular building pierced by a number of little windows. Thebuilding was unfinished; the sky could be seen through the joists of theroofing. Attached to the stop-plank of the gable a bunch of straw mixedwith corn-ears fluttered its tricoloured ribbons in the wind.
Homais was talking. He explained to the company the future importanceof this establishment, computed the strength of the floorings, thethickness of the walls, and regretted extremely not having a yard-sticksuch as Monsieur Binet possessed for his own special use.
Emma, who had taken his arm, bent lightly against his shoulder, andshe looked at the sun’s disc shedding afar through the mist his palesplendour. She turned. Charles was there. His cap was drawn down overhis eyebrows, and his two thick lips were trembling, which added a lookof stupidity to his face; his very back, his calm back, was irritatingto behold, and she saw written upon his coat all the platitude of thebearer.
While she was considering him thus, tasting in her irritation a sort ofdepraved pleasure, Léon made a step forward. The cold that made him paleseemed to add a more gentle languor to his face; between his cravat andhis neck the somewhat loose collar of his shirt showed the skin; thelobe of his ear looked out from beneath a lock of hair, and his largeblue eyes, raised to the clouds, seemed to Emma more limpid and morebeautiful than those mountain-lakes where the heavens are mirrored.
“Wretched boy!” suddenly cried the chemist.
And he ran to his son, who had just precipitated himself into a heap oflime in order to whiten his boots. At the reproaches with which he wasbeing overwhelmed Napoleon began to roar, while Justin dried his shoeswith a wisp of straw. But a knife was wanted; Charles offered his.
“Ah!” she said to herself, “he carried a knife in his pocket like apeasant.”
The hoar-frost was falling, and they turned back to Yonville.
In the evening Madame Bovary did not go to her neighbour’s, and whenCharles had left and she felt herself alone, the comparison re-beganwith the clearness of a sensation almost actual, and with thatlengthening of perspective which memory gives to things. Looking fromher bed at the clean fire that was burning, she still saw, as she haddown there, Léon standing up with one hand behind his cane, and withthe other holding Athalie, who was quietly sucking a piece of ice. Shethought him charming; she could not tear herself away from him; sherecalled his other attitudes on other days, the words he had spoken, thesound of his voice, his whole person; and she repeated, pouting out herlips as if for a kiss--
“Yes, charming! charming! Is he not in love?” she asked herself; “butwith whom? With me?”
All the proofs arose before her at once; her heart leapt. The flame ofthe fire threw a joyous light upon the ceiling; she turned on her back,stretching out her arms.
Then began the eternal lamentation: “Oh, if Heaven had not willed it!And why not? What prevented it?”
When Charles came home at midnight, she seemed to have just awakened,and as he made a noise undressing, she complained of a headache, thenasked carelessly what had happened that evening.
“Monsieur Léon,” he said, “went to his room early.”
She could not help smiling, and she fell asleep, her soul filled with anew delight.
The next day, at dusk, she received a visit from Monsieur Lherueux, thedraper. He was a man of ability, was this shopkeeper. Born a Gascon butbred a Norman, he grafted upon his southern volubility the cunning ofthe Cauchois. His fat, flabby, beardless face seemed dyed by adecoction of liquorice, and his white hair made even more vivid thekeen brilliance of his small black eyes. No one knew what he had beenformerly; a pedlar said some, a banker at Routot according to others.What was certain was that he made complex calculations in his head thatwould have frightened Binet himself. Polite to obsequiousness, he alwaysheld himself with his back bent in the position of one who bows or whoinvites.
After leaving at the door his hat surrounded with crape, he put downa green bandbox on the table, and began by complaining to madame, withmany civilities, that he should have remained till that day withoutgaining her confidence. A poor shop like his was not made to attracta “fashionable lady”; he emphasized the words; yet she had only tocommand, and he would undertake to provide her with anything she mightwish, either in haberdashery or linen, millinery or fancy goods, forhe went to town regularly four times a month. He was connected with thebest houses. You could speak of him at the “Trois Freres,” at the “Barbed’Or,” or at the “Grand Sauvage”; all these gentlemen knew him aswell as the insides of their pockets. To-day, then he had come to showmadame, in passing, various articles he happened to have, thanks tothe most rare opportunity. And he pulled out half-a-dozen embroideredcollars from the box.
Madame Bovary examined them. “I do not require anything,” she said.
Then Monsieur Lheureux delicately exhibited three Algerian scarves,several packets of English needles, a pair of straw slippers, andfinally, four eggcups in cocoanut wood, carved in open work by convicts.Then, with both hands on the table, his neck stretched out, his figurebent forward, open-mouthed, he watched Emma’s look, who was walking upand down undecided amid these goods. From time to time, as if to removesome dust, he filliped with his nail the silk of the scarves spreadout at full length, and they rustled with a little noise, making in thegreen twilight the gold spangles of their tissue scintillate like littlestars.
“How much are they?”
“A mere nothing,” he replied, “a mere nothing. But there’s no hurry;whenever it’s convenient. We are not Jews.”
She reflected for a few moments, and ended by again declining MonsieurLheureux’s offer. He replied quite unconcernedly--
“Very well. We shall understand one another by and by. I have always goton with ladies--if I didn’t with my own!”
Emma smiled.
“I wanted to tell you,” he went on good-naturedly, after his joke, “thatit isn’t the money I should trouble about. Why, I could give you some,if need be.”
She made a gesture of surprise.
“Ah!” said he quickly and in a low voice, “I shouldn’t have to go far tofind you some, rely on that.”
And he began asking after Pere Tellier, the proprietor of the “CafeFrancais,” whom Monsieur Bovary was then attending.
“What’s the matter with Pere Tellier? He coughs so that he shakes hiswhole house, and I’m afraid he’ll soon want a deal covering rather thana flannel vest. He was such a rake as a young man! Those sort of people,madame, have not the least regularity; he’s burnt up with brandy. Stillit’s sad, all the same, to see an acquaintance go off.”
And while he fastened up his box he discoursed about the doctor’spatients.
“It’s the weather, no doubt,” he said, looking frowningly at the floor,“that causes these illnesses. I, too, don’t feel the thing. One of thesedays I shall even have to consult the doctor for a pain I have in myback. Well, good-bye, Madame Bovary. At your service; your very humbleservant.” And he closed the door gently.
Emma had her dinner served in her bedroom on a tray by the fireside; shewas a long time over it; everything was well with her.
“How good I was!” she said to herself, thinking of the scarves.
She heard some steps on the stairs. It was Léon. She got up and tookfrom the chest of drawers the first pile of dusters to be hemmed. Whenhe came in she seemed very busy.
The conversation languished; Madame Bovary gave it up every few minutes,whilst he himself seemed quite embarrassed. Seated on a low chair nearthe fire, he turned round in his fingers the ivory thimble-case. Shestitched on, or from time to time turned down the hem of the cloth withher nail. She did not speak; he was silent, captivated by her silence,as he would have been by her speech.
“Poor fellow!” she thought.
“How have I displeased her?” he asked himself.
At last, however, Léon said that he should have, one of these days, togo to Rouen on some office business.
“Your music subscription is out; am I to renew it?”
“No,” she replied.
“Why?”
“Because--”
And pursing her lips she slowly drew a long stitch of grey thread.
This work irritated Léon. It seemed to roughen the ends of her fingers.A gallant phrase came into his head, but he did not risk it.
“Then you are giving it up?” he went on.
“What?” she asked hurriedly. “Music? Ah! yes! Have I not my house tolook after, my husband to attend to, a thousand things, in fact, manyduties that must be considered first?”
She looked at the clock. Charles was late. Then, she affected anxiety.Two or three times she even repeated, “He is so good!”
The clerk was fond of Monsieur Bovary. But this tenderness on his behalfastonished him unpleasantly; nevertheless he took up on his praises,which he said everyone was singing, especially the chemist.
“Ah! he is a good fellow,” continued Emma.
“Certainly,” replied the clerk.
And he began talking of Madame Homais, whose very untidy appearancegenerally made them laugh.
“What does it matter?” interrupted Emma. “A good housewife does nottrouble about her appearance.”
Then she relapsed into silence.
It was the same on the following days; her talks, her manners,everything changed. She took interest in the housework, went to churchregularly, and looked after her servant with more severity.
She took Berthe from nurse. When visitors called, Félicité brought herin, and Madame Bovary undressed her to show off her limbs. She declaredshe adored children; this was her consolation, her joy, her passion,and she accompanied her caresses with lyrical outburst which would havereminded anyone but the Yonville people of Sachette in “Notre Dame deParis.”
When Charles came home he found his slippers put to warm near the fire.His waistcoat now never wanted lining, nor his shirt buttons, and it wasquite a pleasure to see in the cupboard the night-caps arranged in pilesof the same height. She no longer grumbled as formerly at taking a turnin the garden; what he proposed was always done, although she did notunderstand the wishes to which she submitted without a murmur; and whenLéon saw him by his fireside after dinner, his two hands on his stomach,his two feet on the fender, his two cheeks red with feeding, his eyesmoist with happiness, the child crawling along the carpet, and thiswoman with the slender waist who came behind his arm-chair to kiss hisforehead: “What madness!” he said to himself. “And how to reach her!”
And thus she seemed so virtuous and inaccessible to him that he lost allhope, even the faintest. But by this renunciation he placed her onan extraordinary pinnacle. To him she stood outside those fleshlyattributes from which he had nothing to obtain, and in his heart sherose ever, and became farther removed from him after the magnificentmanner of an apotheosis that is taking wing. It was one of those purefeelings that do not interfere with life, that are cultivated becausethey are rare, and whose loss would afflict more than their passionrejoices.
Emma grew thinner, her cheeks paler, her face longer. With her blackhair, her large eyes, her aquiline nose, her birdlike walk, and alwayssilent now, did she not seem to be passing through life scarcelytouching it, and to bear on her brow the vague impress of some divinedestiny? She was so sad and so calm, at once so gentle and so reserved,that near her one felt oneself seized by an icy charm, as we shudderin churches at the perfume of the flowers mingling with the cold of themarble. The others even did not escape from this seduction. The chemistsaid--
“She is a woman of great parts, who wouldn’t be misplaced in asub-prefecture.”
The housewives admired her economy, the patients her politeness, thepoor her charity.
But she was eaten up with desires, with rage, with hate. That dress withthe narrow folds hid a distracted fear, of whose torment those chastelips said nothing. She was in love with Léon, and sought solitude thatshe might with the more ease delight in his image. The sight of hisform troubled the voluptuousness of this mediation. Emma thrilled atthe sound of his step; then in his presence the emotion subsided, andafterwards there remained to her only an immense astonishment that endedin sorrow.
Léon did not know that when he left her in despair she rose after he hadgone to see him in the street. She concerned herself about his comingsand goings; she watched his face; she invented quite a history to findan excuse for going to his room. The chemist’s wife seemed happy to herto sleep under the same roof, and her thoughts constantly centered uponthis house, like the “Lion d’Or” pigeons, who came there to dip theirred feet and white wings in its gutters. But the more Emma recognisedher love, the more she crushed it down, that it might not be evident,that she might make it less. She would have liked Léon to guess it, andshe imagined chances, catastrophes that should facilitate this.
What restrained her was, no doubt, idleness and fear, and a sense ofshame also. She thought she had repulsed him too much, that the time waspast, that all was lost. Then, pride, and joy of being able to say toherself, “I am virtuous,” and to look at herself in the glass takingresigned poses, consoled her a little for the sacrifice she believed shewas making.
Then the lusts of the flesh, the longing for money, and the melancholyof passion all blended themselves into one suffering, and instead ofturning her thoughts from it, she clave to it the more, urging herselfto pain, and seeking everywhere occasion for it. She was irritated byan ill-served dish or by a half-open door; bewailed the velvets she hadnot, the happiness she had missed, her too exalted dreams, her narrowhome.
What exasperated her was that Charles did not seem to notice heranguish. His conviction that he was making her happy seemed to her animbecile insult, and his sureness on this point ingratitude. For whosesake, then was she virtuous? Was it not for him, the obstacle to allfelicity, the cause of all misery, and, as it were, the sharp clasp ofthat complex strap that bucked her in on all sides.
On him alone, then, she concentrated all the various hatreds thatresulted from her boredom, and every effort to diminish only augmentedit; for this useless trouble was added to the other reasons for despair,and contributed still more to the separation between them. Her owngentleness to herself made her rebel against him. Domestic mediocritydrove her to lewd fancies, marriage tenderness to adulterous desires.She would have liked Charles to beat her, that she might have a betterright to hate him, to revenge herself upon him. She was surprisedsometimes at the atrocious conjectures that came into her thoughts, andshe had to go on smiling, to hear repeated to her at all hours that shewas happy, to pretend to be happy, to let it be believed.
Yet she had loathing of this hypocrisy. She was seized with thetemptation to flee somewhere with Léon to try a new life; but at once avague chasm full of darkness opened within her soul.
“Besides, he no longer loves me,” she thought. “What is to become of me?What help is to be hoped for, what consolation, what solace?”
She was left broken, breathless, inert, sobbing in a low voice, withflowing tears.
“Why don’t you tell master?” the servant asked her when she came induring these crises.
“It is the nerves,” said Emma. “Do not speak to him of it; it wouldworry him.”
“Ah! yes,” Félicité went on, “you are just like La Guerine, PereGuerin’s daughter, the fisherman at Pollet, that I used to know atDieppe before I came to you. She was so sad, so sad, to see herstanding upright on the threshold of her house, she seemed to you like awinding-sheet spread out before the door. Her illness, it appears, wasa kind of fog that she had in her head, and the doctors could not doanything, nor the priest either. When she was taken too bad she wentoff quite alone to the sea-shore, so that the customs officer, going hisrounds, often found her lying flat on her face, crying on the shingle.Then, after her marriage, it went off, they say.”
“But with me,” replied Emma, “it was after marriage that it began.”
Chapter Six
One evening when the window was open, and she, sitting by it, had beenwatching Lestiboudois, the beadle, trimming the box, she suddenly heardthe Angelus ringing.
It was the beginning of April, when the primroses are in bloom, and awarm wind blows over the flower-beds newly turned, and the gardens, likewomen, seem to be getting ready for the summer fetes. Through the barsof the arbour and away beyond the river seen in the fields, meanderingthrough the grass in wandering curves. The evening vapours rose betweenthe leafless poplars, touching their outlines with a violet tint, palerand more transparent than a subtle gauze caught athwart their branches.In the distance cattle moved about; neither their steps nor their lowingcould be heard; and the bell, still ringing through the air, kept up itspeaceful lamentation.
With this repeated tinkling the thoughts of the young woman lostthemselves in old memories of her youth and school-days. She rememberedthe great candlesticks that rose above the vases full of flowers on thealtar, and the tabernacle with its small columns. She would have likedto be once more lost in the long line of white veils, marked off hereand there by the stuff black hoods of the good sisters bending overtheir prie-Dieu. At mass on Sundays, when she looked up, she saw thegentle face of the Virgin amid the blue smoke of the rising incense.Then she was moved; she felt herself weak and quite deserted, like thedown of a bird whirled by the tempest, and it was unconsciously that shewent towards the church, included to no matter what devotions, so thather soul was absorbed and all existence lost in it.
On the Place she met Lestivoudois on his way back, for, in order notto shorten his day’s labour, he preferred interrupting his work,then beginning it again, so that he rang the Angelus to suit his ownconvenience. Besides, the ringing over a little earlier warned the ladsof catechism hour.
Already a few who had arrived were playing marbles on the stones of thecemetery. Others, astride the wall, swung their legs, kicking with theirclogs the large nettles growing between the little enclosure and thenewest graves. This was the only green spot. All the rest was butstones, always covered with a fine powder, despite the vestry-broom.
The children in list shoes ran about there as if it were an enclosuremade for them. The shouts of their voices could be heard through thehumming of the bell. This grew less and less with the swinging of thegreat rope that, hanging from the top of the belfry, dragged its end onthe ground. Swallows flitted to and fro uttering little cries, cut theair with the edge of their wings, and swiftly returned to their yellownests under the tiles of the coping. At the end of the church a lamp wasburning, the wick of a night-light in a glass hung up. Its light from adistance looked like a white stain trembling in the oil. A long ray ofthe sun fell across the nave and seemed to darken the lower sides andthe corners.
“Where is the cure?” asked Madame Bovary of one of the lads, who wasamusing himself by shaking a swivel in a hole too large for it.
“He is just coming,” he answered.
And in fact the door of the presbytery grated; Abbe Bournisien appeared;the children, pell-mell, fled into the church.
“These young scamps!” murmured the priest, “always the same!”
Then, picking up a catechism all in rags that he had struck with isfoot, “They respect nothing!” But as soon as he caught sight of MadameBovary, “Excuse me,” he said; “I did not recognise you.”
He thrust the catechism into his pocket, and stopped short, balancingthe heavy vestry key between his two fingers.
The light of the setting sun that fell full upon his face paled thelasting of his cassock, shiny at the elbows, unravelled at the hem.Grease and tobacco stains followed along his broad chest the linesof the buttons, and grew more numerous the farther they were from hisneckcloth, in which the massive folds of his red chin rested; this wasdotted with yellow spots, that disappeared beneath the coarse hair ofhis greyish beard. He had just dined and was breathing noisily.
“How are you?” he added.
“Not well,” replied Emma; “I am ill.”
“Well, and so am I,” answered the priest. “These first warm days weakenone most remarkably, don’t they? But, after all, we are born to suffer,as St. Paul says. But what does Monsieur Bovary think of it?”
“He!” she said with a gesture of contempt.
“What!” replied the good fellow, quite astonished, “doesn’t he prescribesomething for you?”
“Ah!” said Emma, “it is no earthly remedy I need.”
But the cure from time to time looked into the church, where thekneeling boys were shouldering one another, and tumbling over like packsof cards.
“I should like to know--” she went on.
“You look out, Riboudet,” cried the priest in an angry voice; “I’ll warmyour ears, you imp!” Then turning to Emma, “He’s Boudet the carpenter’sson; his parents are well off, and let him do just as he pleases. Yet hecould learn quickly if he would, for he is very sharp. And so sometimesfor a joke I call him Riboudet (like the road one takes to go toMaromme) and I even say ‘Mon Riboudet.’ Ha! Ha! ‘Mont Riboudet.’ Theother day I repeated that just to Monsignor, and he laughed at it; hecondescended to laugh at it. And how is Monsieur Bovary?”
She seemed not to hear him. And he went on--
“Always very busy, no doubt; for he and I are certainly the busiestpeople in the parish. But he is doctor of the body,” he added with athick laugh, “and I of the soul.”
She fixed her pleading eyes upon the priest. “Yes,” she said, “yousolace all sorrows.”
“Ah! don’t talk to me of it, Madame Bovary. This morning I had to go toBas-Diauville for a cow that was ill; they thought it was under a spell.All their cows, I don’t know how it is--But pardon me! Longuemarre andBoudet! Bless me! Will you leave off?”
And with a bound he ran into the church.
The boys were just then clustering round the large desk, climbing overthe precentor’s footstool, opening the missal; and others on tiptoe werejust about to venture into the confessional. But the priest suddenlydistributed a shower of cuffs among them. Seizing them by the collars oftheir coats, he lifted them from the ground, and deposited them on theirknees on the stones of the choir, firmly, as if he meant planting themthere.
“Yes,” said he, when he returned to Emma, unfolding his large cottonhandkerchief, one corner of which he put between his teeth, “farmers aremuch to be pitied.”
“Others, too,” she replied.
“Assuredly. Town-labourers, for example.”
“It is not they--”
“Pardon! I’ve there known poor mothers of families, virtuous women, Iassure you, real saints, who wanted even bread.”
“But those,” replied Emma, and the corners of her mouth twitched as shespoke, “those, Monsieur le Cure, who have bread and have no--”
“Fire in the winter,” said the priest.
“Oh, what does that matter?”
“What! What does it matter? It seems to me that when one has firing andfood--for, after all--”
“My God! my God!” she sighed.
“It is indigestion, no doubt? You must get home, Madame Bovary; drinka little tea, that will strengthen you, or else a glass of fresh waterwith a little moist sugar.”
“Why?” And she looked like one awaking from a dream.
“Well, you see, you were putting your hand to your forehead. I thoughtyou felt faint.” Then, bethinking himself, “But you were asking mesomething? What was it? I really don’t remember.”
“I? Nothing! nothing!” repeated Emma.
And the glance she cast round her slowly fell upon the old man in thecassock. They looked at one another face to face without speaking.
“Then, Madame Bovary,” he said at last, “excuse me, but duty first, youknow; I must look after my good-for-nothings. The first communion willsoon be upon us, and I fear we shall be behind after all. So afterAscension Day I keep them _recta_[11] an extra hour every Wednesday.Poor children! One cannot lead them too soon into the path of the Lord,as, moreover, he has himself recommended us to do by the mouth of hisDivine Son. Good health to you, madame; my respects to your husband.”
[11] On the straight and narrow path.
And he went into the church making a genuflexion as soon as he reachedthe door.
Emma saw him disappear between the double row of forms, walking with aheavy tread, his head a little bent over his shoulder, and with his twohands half-open behind him.
Then she turned on her heel all of one piece, like a statue on a pivot,and went homewards. But the loud voice of the priest, the clear voicesof the boys still reached her ears, and went on behind her.
“Are you a Christian?”
“Yes, I am a Christian.”
“What is a Christian?”
“He who, being baptized-baptized-baptized--”
She went up the steps of the staircase holding on to the banisters, andwhen she was in her room threw herself into an arm-chair.
The whitish light of the window-panes fell with soft undulations.
The furniture in its place seemed to have become more immobile, and tolose itself in the shadow as in an ocean of darkness. The fire was out,the clock went on ticking, and Emma vaguely marvelled at this calm ofall things while within herself was such tumult. But little Berthe wasthere, between the window and the work-table, tottering on her knittedshoes, and trying to come to her mother to catch hold of the ends of herapron-strings.
“Leave me alone,” said the latter, putting her from her with her hand.
The little girl soon came up closer against her knees, and leaning onthem with her arms, she looked up with her large blue eyes, while asmall thread of pure saliva dribbled from her lips on to the silk apron.
“Leave me alone,” repeated the young woman quite irritably.
Her face frightened the child, who began to scream.
“Will you leave me alone?” she said, pushing her with her elbow.
Berthe fell at the foot of the drawers against the brass handle, cuttingher cheek, which began to bleed, against it. Madame Bovary sprang tolift her up, broke the bell-rope, called for the servant with all hermight, and she was just going to curse herself when Charles appeared. Itwas the dinner-hour; he had come home.
“Look, dear!” said Emma, in a calm voice, “the little one fell downwhile she was playing, and has hurt herself.”
Charles reassured her; the case was not a serious one, and he went forsome sticking plaster.
Madame Bovary did not go downstairs to the dining-room; she wishedto remain alone to look after the child. Then watching her sleep, thelittle anxiety she felt gradually wore off, and she seemed very stupidto herself, and very good to have been so worried just now at so little.Berthe, in fact, no longer sobbed.
Her breathing now imperceptibly raised the cotton covering. Big tearslay in the corner of the half-closed eyelids, through whose lashes onecould see two pale sunken pupils; the plaster stuck on her cheek drewthe skin obliquely.
“It is very strange,” thought Emma, “how ugly this child is!”
When at eleven o’clock Charles came back from the chemist’s shop,whither he had gone after dinner to return the remainder of thesticking-plaster, he found his wife standing by the cradle.
“I assure you it’s nothing.” he said, kissing her on the forehead.“Don’t worry, my poor darling; you will make yourself ill.”
He had stayed a long time at the chemist’s. Although he had not seemedmuch moved, Homais, nevertheless, had exerted himself to buoy him up, to“keep up his spirits.” Then they had talked of the various dangers thatthreaten childhood, of the carelessness of servants. Madame Homais knewsomething of it, having still upon her chest the marks left by a basinfull of soup that a cook had formerly dropped on her pinafore, andher good parents took no end of trouble for her. The knives were notsharpened, nor the floors waxed; there were iron gratings to the windowsand strong bars across the fireplace; the little Homais, in spite oftheir spirit, could not stir without someone watching them; at theslightest cold their father stuffed them with pectorals; and untilthey were turned four they all, without pity, had to wear waddedhead-protectors. This, it is true, was a fancy of Madame Homais’; herhusband was inwardly afflicted at it. Fearing the possible consequencesof such compression to the intellectual organs. He even went so far asto say to her, “Do you want to make Caribs or Botocudos of them?”
Charles, however, had several times tried to interrupt the conversation.“I should like to speak to you,” he had whispered in the clerk’s ear,who went upstairs in front of him.
“Can he suspect anything?” Léon asked himself. His heart beat, and heracked his brain with surmises.
At last, Charles, having shut the door, asked him to see himselfwhat would be the price at Rouen of a fine daguerreotypes. It was asentimental surprise he intended for his wife, a delicate attention--hisportrait in a frock-coat. But he wanted first to know “how much it wouldbe.” The inquiries would not put Monsieur Léon out, since he went totown almost every week.
Why? Monsieur Homais suspected some “young man’s affair” at the bottomof it, an intrigue. But he was mistaken. Léon was after no love-making.He was sadder than ever, as Madame Lefrancois saw from the amount offood he left on his plate. To find out more about it she questionedthe tax-collector. Binet answered roughly that he “wasn’t paid by thepolice.”
All the same, his companion seemed very strange to him, for Léon oftenthrew himself back in his chair, and stretching out his arms, complained vaguely of life.
“It’s because you don’t take enough recreation,” said the collector.
“What recreation?”
“If I were you I’d have a lathe.”
“But I don’t know how to turn,” answered the clerk.
“Ah! that’s true,” said the other, rubbing his chin with an air ofmingled contempt and satisfaction.
Léon was weary of loving without any result; moreover he was beginningto feel that depression caused by the repetition of the same kind oflife, when no interest inspires and no hope sustains it. He was so boredwith Yonville and its inhabitants, that the sight of certain persons,of certain houses, irritated him beyond endurance; and the chemist, goodfellow though he was, was becoming absolutely unbearable to him. Yetthe prospect of a new condition of life frightened as much as it seducedhim.
This apprehension soon changed into impatience, and then Paris from afarsounded its fanfare of masked balls with the laugh of grisettes. As hewas to finish reading there, why not set out at once? What preventedhim? And he began making home-preparations; he arranged his occupationsbeforehand. He furnished in his head an apartment. He would lead anartist’s life there! He would take lessons on the guitar! He would havea dressing-gown, a Basque cap, blue velvet slippers! He even already wasadmiring two crossed foils over his chimney-piece, with a death’s headon the guitar above them.
The difficulty was the consent of his mother; nothing, however, seemedmore reasonable. Even his employer advised him to go to some otherchambers where he could advance more rapidly. Taking a middle course,then, Léon looked for some place as second clerk at Rouen; found none,and at last wrote his mother a long letter full of details, in whichhe set forth the reasons for going to live at Paris immediately. Sheconsented.
He did not hurry. Every day for a month Hivert carried boxes, valises,parcels for him from Yonville to Rouen and from Rouen to Yonville;and when Léon had packed up his wardrobe, had his three arm-chairsrestuffed, bought a stock of neckties, in a word, had made morepreparations than for a voyage around the world, he put it off from weekto week, until he received a second letter from his mother urging him toleave, since he wanted to pass his examination before the vacation.
When the moment for the farewells had come, Madame Homais wept, Justinsobbed; Homais, as a man of nerve, concealed his emotion; he wished tocarry his friend’s overcoat himself as far as the gate of the notary,who was taking Léon to Rouen in his carriage.
The latter had just time to bid farewell to Monsieur Bovary.
When he reached the head of the stairs, he stopped, he was so out ofbreath. As he came in, Madame Bovary arose hurriedly.
“It is I again!” said Léon.
“I was sure of it!”
She bit her lips, and a rush of blood flowing under her skin made herred from the roots of her hair to the top of her collar. She remainedstanding, leaning with her shoulder against the wainscot.
“The doctor is not here?” he went on.
“He is out.” She repeated, “He is out.”
Then there was silence. They looked at one another and their thoughts,confounded in the same agony, clung close together like two throbbingbreasts.
“I should like to kiss Berthe,” said Léon.
Emma went down a few steps and called Félicité.
He threw one long look around him that took in the walls, thedecorations, the fireplace, as if to penetrate everything, carry awayeverything. But she returned, and the servant brought Berthe, who wasswinging a windmill roof downwards at the end of a string. Léon kissedher several times on the neck.
“Good-bye, poor child! good-bye, dear little one! good-bye!” And he gaveher back to her mother.
“Take her away,” she said.
They remained alone--Madame Bovary, her back turned, her face pressedagainst a window-pane; Léon held his cap in his hand, knocking it softlyagainst his thigh.
“It is going to rain,” said Emma.
“I have a cloak,” he answered.
“Ah!”
She turned around, her chin lowered, her forehead bent forward.
The light fell on it as on a piece of marble, to the curve of theeyebrows, without one’s being able to guess what Emma was seeing on thehorizon or what she was thinking within herself.
“Well, good-bye,” he sighed.
She raised her head with a quick movement.
“Yes, good-bye--go!”
They advanced towards each other; he held out his hand; she hesitated.
“In the English fashion, then,” she said, giving her own hand wholly tohim, and forcing a laugh.
Léon felt it between his fingers, and the very essence of all his beingseemed to pass down into that moist palm. Then he opened his hand; theireyes met again, and he disappeared.
When he reached the market-place, he stopped and hid behind a pillar tolook for the last time at this white house with the four green blinds.He thought he saw a shadow behind the window in the room; but thecurtain, sliding along the pole as though no one were touching it,slowly opened its long oblique folds that spread out with a singlemovement, and thus hung straight and motionless as a plaster wall. Léonset off running.
From afar he saw his employer’s gig in the road, and by it a man ina coarse apron holding the horse. Homais and Monsieur Guillaumin weretalking. They were waiting for him.
“Embrace me,” said the druggist with tears in his eyes. “Here is yourcoat, my good friend. Mind the cold; take care of yourself; look afteryourself.”
“Come, Léon, jump in,” said the notary.
Homais bent over the splash-board, and in a voice broken by sobs utteredthese three sad words--
“A pleasant journey!”
“Good-night,” said Monsieur Guillaumin. “Give him his head.” They setout, and Homais went back.
Madame Bovary had opened her window overlooking the garden and watchedthe clouds. They gathered around the sunset on the side of Rouen andthen swiftly rolled back their black columns, behind which the greatrays of the sun looked out like the golden arrows of a suspended trophy,while the rest of the empty heavens was white as porcelain. But a gustof wind bowed the poplars, and suddenly the rain fell; it patteredagainst the green leaves.
Then the sun reappeared, the hens clucked, sparrows shook their wings inthe damp thickets, and the pools of water on the gravel as they flowedaway carried off the pink flowers of an acacia.
“Ah! how far off he must be already!” she thought.
Monsieur Homais, as usual, came at half-past six during dinner.
“Well,” said he, “so we’ve sent off our young friend!”
“So it seems,” replied the doctor. Then turning on his chair; “Any newsat home?”
“Nothing much. Only my wife was a little moved this afternoon. You knowwomen--a nothing upsets them, especially my wife. And we should bewrong to object to that, since their nervous organization is much moremalleable than ours.”
“Poor Léon!” said Charles. “How will he live at Paris? Will he get usedto it?”
Madame Bovary sighed.
“Get along!” said the chemist, smacking his lips. “The outings atrestaurants, the masked balls, the champagne--all that’ll be jollyenough, I assure you.”
“I don’t think he’ll go wrong,” objected Bovary.
“Nor do I,” said Monsieur Homais quickly; “although he’ll have to dolike the rest for fear of passing for a Jesuit. And you don’t know whata life those dogs lead in the Latin quarter with actresses. Besides,students are thought a great deal of in Paris. Provided they have a fewaccomplishments, they are received in the best society; there are evenladies of the Faubourg Saint-Germain who fall in love with them, whichsubsequently furnishes them opportunities for making very good matches.”
“But,” said the doctor, “I fear for him that down there--”
“You are right,” interrupted the chemist; “that is the reverse of themedal. And one is constantly obliged to keep one’s hand in one’s pocketthere. Thus, we will suppose you are in a public garden. An individualpresents himself, well dressed, even wearing an order, and whom onewould take for a diplomatist. He approaches you, he insinuates himself;offers you a pinch of snuff, or picks up your hat. Then you become moreintimate; he takes you to a cafe, invites you to his country-house,introduces you, between two drinks, to all sorts of people; andthree-fourths of the time it’s only to plunder your watch or lead youinto some pernicious step.
“That is true,” said Charles; “but I was thinking especially ofillnesses--of typhoid fever, for example, that attacks students from theprovinces.”
Emma shuddered.
“Because of the change of regimen,” continued the chemist, “and of theperturbation that results therefrom in the whole system. And then thewater at Paris, don’t you know! The dishes at restaurants, all thespiced food, end by heating the blood, and are not worth, whateverpeople may say of them, a good soup. For my own part, I have alwayspreferred plain living; it is more healthy. So when I was studyingpharmacy at Rouen, I boarded in a boarding house; I dined with theprofessors.”
And thus he went on, expounding his opinions generally and his personallikings, until Justin came to fetch him for a mulled egg that waswanted.
“Not a moment’s peace!” he cried; “always at it! I can’t go out for aminute! Like a plough-horse, I have always to be moiling and toiling.What drudgery!” Then, when he was at the door, “By the way, do you knowthe news?”
“What news?”
“That it is very likely,” Homais went on, raising his eyebrows andassuming one of his most serious expression, “that the agriculturalmeeting of the Seine-Inferieure will be held this year atYonville-l’Abbaye. The rumour, at all events, is going the round. Thismorning the paper alluded to it. It would be of the utmost importancefor our district. But we’ll talk it over later on. I can see, thank you;Justin has the lantern.”
Chapter Seven
The next day was a dreary one for Emma. Everything seemed to herenveloped in a black atmosphere floating confusedly over the exterior ofthings, and sorrow was engulfed within her soul with soft shrieks suchas the winter wind makes in ruined castles. It was that reverie which wegive to things that will not return, the lassitude that seizes you aftereverything was done; that pain, in fine, that the interruption of everywonted movement, the sudden cessation of any prolonged vibration, bringson.
As on the return from Vaubyessard, when the quadrilles were running inher head, she was full of a gloomy melancholy, of a numb despair.Léon reappeared, taller, handsomer, more charming, more vague. Thoughseparated from her, he had not left her; he was there, and the walls ofthe house seemed to hold his shadow.
She could not detach her eyes from the carpet where he had walked, fromthose empty chairs where he had sat. The river still flowed on, andslowly drove its ripples along the slippery banks.
They had often walked there to the murmur of the waves over themoss-covered pebbles. How bright the sun had been! What happy afternoonsthey had seen alone in the shade at the end of the garden! He readaloud, bareheaded, sitting on a footstool of dry sticks; the fresh windof the meadow set trembling the leaves of the book and the nasturtiumsof the arbour. Ah! he was gone, the only charm of her life, the onlypossible hope of joy. Why had she not seized this happiness when it cameto her? Why not have kept hold of it with both hands, with both knees,when it was about to flee from her? And she cursed herself for nothaving loved Léon. She thirsted for his lips. The wish took possessionof her to run after and rejoin him, throw herself into his arms andsay to him, “It is I; I am yours.” But Emma recoiled beforehand at thedifficulties of the enterprise, and her desires, increased by regret,became only the more acute.
Henceforth the memory of Léon was the centre of her boredom; it burntthere more brightly than the fire travellers have left on the snow ofa Russian steppe. She sprang towards him, she pressed against him, shestirred carefully the dying embers, sought all around her anythingthat could revive it; and the most distant reminiscences, like the mostimmediate occasions, what she experienced as well as what she imagined,her voluptuous desires that were unsatisfied, her projects of happinessthat crackled in the wind like dead boughs, her sterile virtue, herlost hopes, the domestic _tête-à-tête_--she gathered it all up, tookeverything, and made it all serve as fuel for her melancholy.
The flames, however, subsided, either because the supply had exhausteditself, or because it had been piled up too much. Love, little bylittle, was quelled by absence; regret stifled beneath habit; and thisincendiary light that had empurpled her pale sky was overspread andfaded by degrees. In the supineness of her conscience she even took herrepugnance towards her husband for aspirations towards her lover, theburning of hate for the warmth of tenderness; but as the tempest stillraged, and as passion burnt itself down to the very cinders, and no helpcame, no sun rose, there was night on all sides, and she was lost in theterrible cold that pierced her.
Then the evil days of Tostes began again. She thought herself now farmore unhappy; for she had the experience of grief, with the certaintythat it would not end.
A woman who had laid on herself such sacrifices could well allow herselfcertain whims. She bought a Gothic prie-dieu, and in a month spentfourteen francs on lemons for polishing her nails; she wrote to Rouenfor a blue cashmere gown; she chose one of Lheureux’s finest scarves,and wore it knotted around her waist over her dressing-gown; and, withclosed blinds and a book in her hand, she lay stretched out on a couchin this garb.
She often changed her coiffure; she did her hair a la Chinoise, inflowing curls, in plaited coils; she parted in on one side and rolled itunder like a man’s.
She wanted to learn Italian; she bought dictionaries, a grammar, anda supply of white paper. She tried serious reading, history, andphilosophy. Sometimes in the night Charles woke up with a start,thinking he was being called to a patient. “I’m coming,” he stammered;and it was the noise of a match Emma had struck to relight the lamp. Buther reading fared like her piece of embroidery, all of which, only justbegun, filled her cupboard; she took it up, left it, passed on to otherbooks.
She had attacks in which she could easily have been driven to commit anyfolly. She maintained one day, in opposition to her husband, that shecould drink off a large glass of brandy, and, as Charles was stupidenough to dare her to, she swallowed the brandy to the last drop.
In spite of her vapourish airs (as the housewives of Yonville calledthem), Emma, all the same, never seemed gay, and usually she had at thecorners of her mouth that immobile contraction that puckers the faces ofold maids, and those of men whose ambition has failed. She was pale allover, white as a sheet; the skin of her nose was drawn at the nostrils,her eyes looked at you vaguely. After discovering three grey hairs onher temples, she talked much of her old age.
She often fainted. One day she even spat blood, and, as Charles fussedaround her showing his anxiety--
“Bah!” she answered, “what does it matter?”
Charles fled to his study and wept there, both his elbows on the table,sitting in an arm-chair at his bureau under the phrenological head.
Then he wrote to his mother begging her to come, and they had many longconsultations together on the subject of Emma.
What should they decide? What was to be done since she rejected allmedical treatment? “Do you know what your wife wants?” replied MadameBovary senior.
“She wants to be forced to occupy herself with some manual work. If shewere obliged, like so many others, to earn her living, she wouldn’t havethese vapours, that come to her from a lot of ideas she stuffs into herhead, and from the idleness in which she lives.”
“Yet she is always busy,” said Charles.
“Ah! always busy at what? Reading novels, bad books, works againstreligion, and in which they mock at priests in speeches taken fromVoltaire. But all that leads you far astray, my poor child. Anyone whohas no religion always ends by turning out badly.”
So it was decided to stop Emma reading novels. The enterprise did notseem easy. The good lady undertook it. She was, when she passed throughRouen, to go herself to the lending-library and represent that Emma haddiscontinued her subscription. Would they not have a right to applyto the police if the librarian persisted all the same in his poisonoustrade? The farewells of mother and daughter-in-law were cold. Duringthe three weeks that they had been together they had not exchangedhalf-a-dozen words apart from the inquiries and phrases when they met attable and in the evening before going to bed.
Madame Bovary left on a Wednesday, the market-day at Yonville.
The Place since morning had been blocked by a row of carts, which, onend and their shafts in the air, spread all along the line of housesfrom the church to the inn. On the other side there were canvas booths,where cotton checks, blankets, and woollen stockings were sold,together with harness for horses, and packets of blue ribbon, whose endsfluttered in the wind. The coarse hardware was spread out on the groundbetween pyramids of eggs and hampers of cheeses, from which sticky strawstuck out.
Near the corn-machines clucking hens passed their necks through the barsof flat cages. The people, crowding in the same place and unwillingto move thence, sometimes threatened to smash the shop front of thechemist. On Wednesdays his shop was never empty, and the people pushedin less to buy drugs than for consultations. So great was Homais’reputation in the neighbouring villages. His robust aplomb hadfascinated the rustics. They considered him a greater doctor than allthe doctors.
Emma was leaning out at the window; she was often there. The window inthe provinces replaces the theatre and the promenade, she was amusingherself with watching the crowd of boors when she saw a gentleman ina green velvet coat. He had on yellow gloves, although he wore heavygaiters; he was coming towards the doctor’s house, followed by a peasantwalking with a bent head and quite a thoughtful air.
“Can I see the doctor?” he asked Justin, who was talking on thedoorsteps with Félicité, and, taking him for a servant of thehouse--“Tell him that Monsieur Rodolphe Boulanger of La Huchette ishere.”
It was not from territorial vanity that the new arrival added “of LaHuchette” to his name, but to make himself the better known.
La Huchette, in fact, was an estate near Yonville, where he had justbought the château and two farms that he cultivated himself, without,however, troubling very much about them. He lived as a bachelor, and wassupposed to have “at least fifteen thousand francs a year.”
Charles came into the room. Monsieur Boulanger introduced his man, whowanted to be bled because he felt “a tingling all over.”
“That’ll purge me,” he urged as an objection to all reasoning.
So Bovary ordered a bandage and a basin, and asked Justin to hold it.Then addressing the peasant, who was already pale--
“Don’t be afraid, my lad.”
“No, no, sir,” said the other; “get on.”
And with an air of bravado he held out his great arm. At the prick ofthe lancet the blood spurted out, splashing against the looking-glass.
“Hold the basin nearer,” exclaimed Charles.
“Lor!” said the peasant, “one would swear it was a little fountainflowing. How red my blood is! That’s a good sign, isn’t it?”
“Sometimes,” answered the doctor, “one feels nothing at first, and thensyncope sets in, and more especially with people of strong constitutionlike this man.”
At these words the rustic let go the lancet-case he was twisting betweenhis fingers. A shudder of his shoulders made the chair-back creak. Hishat fell off.
“I thought as much,” said Bovary, pressing his finger on the vein.
The basin was beginning to tremble in Justin’s hands; his knees shook,he turned pale.
“Emma! Emma!” called Charles.
With one bound she came down the staircase.
“Some vinegar,” he cried. “O dear! two at once!”
And in his emotion he could hardly put on the compress.
“It is nothing,” said Monsieur Boulanger quietly, taking Justin in hisarms. He seated him on the table with his back resting against the wall.
Madame Bovary began taking off his cravat. The strings of his shirt hadgot into a knot, and she was for some minutes moving her light fingersabout the young fellow’s neck. Then she poured some vinegar on hercambric handkerchief; she moistened his temples with little dabs, andthen blew upon them softly. The ploughman revived, but Justin’s syncopestill lasted, and his eyeballs disappeared in the pale sclerotics likeblue flowers in milk.
“We must hide this from him,” said Charles.
Madame Bovary took the basin to put it under the table. With themovement she made in bending down, her dress (it was a summer dress withfour flounces, yellow, long in the waist and wide in the skirt) spreadout around her on the flags of the room; and as Emma stooping, staggereda little as she stretched out her arms.
The stuff here and there gave with the inflections of her bust.
Then she went to fetch a bottle of water, and she was melting somepieces of sugar when the chemist arrived. The servant had been tofetch him in the tumult. Seeing his pupil’s eyes staring he drew a longbreath; then going around him he looked at him from head to foot.
“Fool!” he said, “really a little fool! A fool in four letters! Aphlebotomy’s a big affair, isn’t it! And a fellow who isn’t afraid ofanything; a kind of squirrel, just as he is who climbs to vertiginousheights to shake down nuts. Oh, yes! you just talk to me, boast aboutyourself! Here’s a fine fitness for practising pharmacy later on; forunder serious circumstances you may be called before the tribunals inorder to enlighten the minds of the magistrates, and you would have tokeep your head then, to reason, show yourself a man, or else pass for animbecile.”
Justin did not answer. The chemist went on--
“Who asked you to come? You are always pestering the doctor and madame.On Wednesday, moreover, your presence is indispensable to me. There arenow twenty people in the shop. I left everything because of the interestI take in you. Come, get along! Sharp! Wait for me, and keep an eye onthe jars.”
When Justin, who was rearranging his dress, had gone, they talked for alittle while about fainting-fits. Madame Bovary had never fainted.
“That is extraordinary for a lady,” said Monsieur Boulanger; “but somepeople are very susceptible. Thus in a duel, I have seen a second loseconsciousness at the mere sound of the loading of pistols.”
“For my part,” said the chemist, “the sight of other people’s blooddoesn’t affect me at all, but the mere thought of my own flowing wouldmake me faint if I reflected upon it too much.”
Monsieur Boulanger, however, dismissed his servant, advising him to calmhimself, since his fancy was over.
“It procured me the advantage of making your acquaintance,” he added,and he looked at Emma as he said this. Then he put three francs on thecorner of the table, bowed negligently, and went out.
He was soon on the other side of the river (this was his way back to LaHuchette), and Emma saw him in the meadow, walking under the poplars,slackening his pace now and then as one who reflects.
“She is very pretty,” he said to himself; “she is very pretty, thisdoctor’s wife. Fine teeth, black eyes, a dainty foot, a figure like aParisienne’s. Where the devil does she come from? Wherever did that fatfellow pick her up?”
Monsieur Rodolphe Boulanger was thirty-four; he was of brutaltemperament and intelligent perspicacity, having, moreover, had much todo with women, and knowing them well. This one had seemed pretty to him;so he was thinking about her and her husband.
“I think he is very stupid. She is tired of him, no doubt. He has dirtynails, and hasn’t shaved for three days. While he is trotting after hispatients, she sits there botching socks. And she gets bored! She wouldlike to live in town and dance polkas every evening. Poor little woman!She is gaping after love like a carp after water on a kitchen-table.With three words of gallantry she’d adore one, I’m sure of it. She’d betender, charming. Yes; but how to get rid of her afterwards?”
Then the difficulties of love-making seen in the distance made him bycontrast think of his mistress. She was an actress at Rouen, whom hekept; and when he had pondered over this image, with which, even inremembrance, he was satiated--
“Ah! Madame Bovary,” he thought, “is much prettier, especially fresher.Virginie is decidedly beginning to grow fat. She is so finiky about herpleasures; and, besides, she has a mania for prawns.”
The fields were empty, and around him Rodolphe only heard the regularbeating of the grass striking against his boots, with a cry of thegrasshopper hidden at a distance among the oats. He again saw Emma inher room, dressed as he had seen her, and he undressed her.
“Oh, I will have her,” he cried, striking a blow with his stick at aclod in front of him. And he at once began to consider the politicalpart of the enterprise. He asked himself--
“Where shall we meet? By what means? We shall always be having the braton our hands, and the servant, the neighbours, and husband, all sorts ofworries. Pshaw! one would lose too much time over it.”
Then he resumed, “She really has eyes that pierce one’s heart like agimlet. And that pale complexion! I adore pale women!”
When he reached the top of the Arguiel hills he had made up his mind.“It’s only finding the opportunities. Well, I will call in now and then.I’ll send them venison, poultry; I’ll have myself bled, if need be. Weshall become friends; I’ll invite them to my place. By Jove!” added he,“there’s the agricultural show coming on. She’ll be there. I shall seeher. We’ll begin boldly, for that’s the surest way.”
Chapter Eight
At last it came, the famous agricultural show. On the morning of thesolemnity all the inhabitants at their doors were chatting over thepreparations. The pediment of the town hall had been hung with garlandsof ivy; a tent had been erected in a meadow for the banquet; and in themiddle of the Place, in front of the church, a kind of bombarde wasto announce the arrival of the prefect and the names of the successfulfarmers who had obtained prizes. The National Guard of Buchy (there wasnone at Yonville) had come to join the corps of firemen, of whom Binetwas captain. On that day he wore a collar even higher than usual; and,tightly buttoned in his tunic, his figure was so stiff and motionlessthat the whole vital portion of his person seemed to have descended intohis legs, which rose in a cadence of set steps with a single movement.As there was some rivalry between the tax-collector and the colonel,both, to show off their talents, drilled their men separately. Onesaw the red epaulettes and the black breastplates pass and re-passalternately; there was no end to it, and it constantly began again.There had never been such a display of pomp. Several citizens hadscoured their houses the evening before; tri-coloured flags hung fromhalf-open windows; all the public-houses were full; and in the lovelyweather the starched caps, the golden crosses, and the colouredneckerchiefs seemed whiter than snow, shone in the sun, and relievedwith the motley colours the sombre monotony of the frock-coats and bluesmocks. The neighbouring farmers’ wives, when they got off their horses,pulled out the long pins that fastened around them their dresses, turnedup for fear of mud; and the husbands, for their part, in order to savetheir hats, kept their handkerchiefs around them, holding one cornerbetween their teeth.
The crowd came into the main street from both ends of the village.People poured in from the lanes, the alleys, the houses; and from timeto time one heard knockers banging against doors closing behind womenwith their gloves, who were going out to see the fete. What was mostadmired were two long lamp-stands covered with lanterns, that flanked aplatform on which the authorities were to sit. Besides this there wereagainst the four columns of the town hall four kinds of poles,each bearing a small standard of greenish cloth, embellished withinscriptions in gold letters.
On one was written, “To Commerce”; on the other, “To Agriculture”; onthe third, “To Industry”; and on the fourth, “To the Fine Arts.”
But the jubilation that brightened all faces seemed to darken that ofMadame Lefrancois, the innkeeper. Standing on her kitchen-steps shemuttered to herself, “What rubbish! what rubbish! With their canvasbooth! Do they think the prefect will be glad to dine down there undera tent like a gipsy? They call all this fussing doing good to the place!Then it wasn’t worth while sending to Neufchâtel for the keeper of acookshop! And for whom? For cowherds! tatterdemalions!”
The druggist was passing. He had on a frock-coat, nankeen trousers,beaver shoes, and, for a wonder, a hat with a low crown.
“Your servant! Excuse me, I am in a hurry.” And as the fat widow askedwhere he was going--
“It seems odd to you, doesn’t it, I who am always more cooped up in mylaboratory than the man’s rat in his cheese.”
“What cheese?” asked the landlady.
“Oh, nothing! nothing!” Homais continued. “I merely wished to conveyto you, Madame Lefrancois, that I usually live at home like a recluse.To-day, however, considering the circumstances, it is necessary--”
“Oh, you’re going down there!” she said contemptuously.
“Yes, I am going,” replied the druggist, astonished. “Am I not a memberof the consulting commission?”
Mere Lefrancois looked at him for a few moments, and ended by sayingwith a smile--
“That’s another pair of shoes! But what does agriculture matter to you?Do you understand anything about it?”
“Certainly I understand it, since I am a druggist--that is to say,a chemist. And the object of chemistry, Madame Lefrancois, being theknowledge of the reciprocal and molecular action of all natural bodies,it follows that agriculture is comprised within its domain. And, infact, the composition of the manure, the fermentation of liquids, theanalyses of gases, and the influence of miasmata, what, I ask you, isall this, if it isn’t chemistry, pure and simple?”
The landlady did not answer. Homais went on--
“Do you think that to be an agriculturist it is necessary to have tilledthe earth or fattened fowls oneself? It is necessary rather to know thecomposition of the substances in question--the geological strata, theatmospheric actions, the quality of the soil, the minerals, the waters,the density of the different bodies, their capillarity, and what not.And one must be master of all the principles of hygiene in order todirect, criticize the construction of buildings, the feeding of animals,the diet of domestics. And, moreover, Madame Lefrancois, one must knowbotany, be able to distinguish between plants, you understand, which arethe wholesome and those that are deleterious, which are unproductiveand which nutritive, if it is well to pull them up here and re-sow themthere, to propagate some, destroy others; in brief, one must keep pacewith science by means of pamphlets and public papers, be always on thealert to find out improvements.”
The landlady never took her eyes off the “Cafe Francois” and the chemistwent on--
“Would to God our agriculturists were chemists, or that at least theywould pay more attention to the counsels of science. Thus lately Imyself wrote a considerable tract, a memoir of over seventy-two pages,entitled, ‘Cider, its Manufacture and its Effects, together with someNew Reflections on the Subject,’ that I sent to the Agricultural Societyof Rouen, and which even procured me the honour of being received amongits members--Section, Agriculture; Class, Pomological. Well, if mywork had been given to the public--” But the druggist stopped, MadameLefrancois seemed so preoccupied.
“Just look at them!” she said. “It’s past comprehension! Such a cookshopas that!” And with a shrug of the shoulders that stretched out over herbreast the stitches of her knitted bodice, she pointed with both handsat her rival’s inn, whence songs were heard issuing. “Well, it won’tlast long,” she added. “It’ll be over before a week.”
Homais drew back with stupefaction. She came down three steps andwhispered in his ear--
“What! you didn’t know it? There is to be an execution in next week.It’s Lheureux who is selling him out; he has killed him with bills.”
“What a terrible catastrophe!” cried the druggist, who always foundexpressions in harmony with all imaginable circumstances.
Then the landlady began telling him the story that she had heard fromTheodore, Monsieur Guillaumin’s servant, and although she detestedTellier, she blamed Lheureux. He was “a wheedler, a sneak.”
“There!” she said. “Look at him! he is in the market; he is bowing toMadame Bovary, who’s got on a green bonnet. Why, she’s taking MonsieurBoulanger’s arm.”
“Madame Bovary!” exclaimed Homais. “I must go at once and pay her myrespects. Perhaps she’ll be very glad to have a seat in the enclosureunder the peristyle.” And, without heeding Madame Lefrancois, who wascalling him back to tell him more about it, the druggist walked offrapidly with a smile on his lips, with straight knees, bowing copiouslyto right and left, and taking up much room with the large tails of hisfrock-coat that fluttered behind him in the wind.
Rodolphe, having caught sight of him from afar, hurried on, but MadameBovary lost her breath; so he walked more slowly, and, smiling at her,said in a rough tone--
“It’s only to get away from that fat fellow, you know, the druggist.” She pressed his elbow.
“What’s the meaning of that?” he asked himself. And he looked at her outof the corner of his eyes.
Her profile was so calm that one could guess nothing from it. It stoodout in the light from the oval of her bonnet, with pale ribbons on itlike the leaves of weeds. Her eyes with their long curved lashes lookedstraight before her, and though wide open, they seemed slightly puckeredby the cheek-bones, because of the blood pulsing gently under thedelicate skin. A pink line ran along the partition between her nostrils.Her head was bent upon her shoulder, and the pearl tips of her whiteteeth were seen between her lips.
“Is she making fun of me?” thought Rodolphe.
Emma’s gesture, however, had only been meant for a warning; for MonsieurLheureux was accompanying them, and spoke now and again as if to enterinto the conversation.
“What a superb day! Everybody is out! The wind is east!”
And neither Madame Bovary nor Rodolphe answered him, whilst at theslightest movement made by them he drew near, saying, “I beg yourpardon!” and raised his hat.
When they reached the farrier’s house, instead of following the roadup to the fence, Rodolphe suddenly turned down a path, drawing with himMadame Bovary. He called out--
“Good evening, Monsieur Lheureux! See you again presently.”
“How you got rid of him!” she said, laughing.
“Why,” he went on, “allow oneself to be intruded upon by others? And asto-day I have the happiness of being with you--”
Emma blushed. He did not finish his sentence. Then he talked of the fineweather and of the pleasure of walking on the grass. A few daisies hadsprung up again.
“Here are some pretty Easter daisies,” he said, “and enough of them tofurnish oracles to all the amorous maids in the place.”
He added, “Shall I pick some? What do you think?”
“Are you in love?” she asked, coughing a little.
“H’m, h’m! who knows?” answered Rodolphe.
The meadow began to fill, and the housewives hustled you with theirgreat umbrellas, their baskets, and their babies. One had often to getout of the way of a long file of country folk, servant-maids with bluestockings, flat shoes, silver rings, and who smelt of milk, when onepassed close to them. They walked along holding one another by the hand,and thus they spread over the whole field from the row of open trees tothe banquet tent.
But this was the examination time, and the farmers one after the otherentered a kind of enclosure formed by a long cord supported on sticks.
The beasts were there, their noses towards the cord, and making aconfused line with their unequal rumps. Drowsy pigs were burrowing inthe earth with their snouts, calves were bleating, lambs baaing; thecows, on knees folded in, were stretching their bellies on the grass,slowly chewing the cud, and blinking their heavy eyelids at the gnatsthat buzzed round them. Plough-men with bare arms were holding by thehalter prancing stallions that neighed with dilated nostrils lookingtowards the mares. These stood quietly, stretching out their heads andflowing manes, while their foals rested in their shadow, or now and thencame and sucked them. And above the long undulation of these crowdedanimals one saw some white mane rising in the wind like a wave, or somesharp horns sticking out, and the heads of men running about. Apart,outside the enclosure, a hundred paces off, was a large black bull,muzzled, with an iron ring in its nostrils, and who moved no more thanif he had been in bronze. A child in rags was holding him by a rope.
Between the two lines the committee-men were walking with heavy steps,examining each animal, then consulting one another in a low voice. Onewho seemed of more importance now and then took notes in a book as hewalked along. This was the president of the jury, Monsieur Derozerays dela Panville. As soon as he recognised Rodolphe he came forward quickly,and smiling amiably, said--
“What! Monsieur Boulanger, you are deserting us?”
Rodolphe protested that he was just coming. But when the president haddisappeared--
“_Ma foi!_”[12] said he, “I shall not go. Your company is better thanhis.”
[12] Upon my word!
And while poking fun at the show, Rodolphe, to move about more easily,showed the gendarme his blue card, and even stopped now and then infront of some fine beast, which Madame Bovary did not at all admire.He noticed this, and began jeering at the Yonville ladies and theirdresses; then he apologised for the negligence of his own. He had thatincongruity of common and elegant in which the habitually vulgar thinkthey see the revelation of an eccentric existence, of the perturbationsof sentiment, the tyrannies of art, and always a certain contempt forsocial conventions, that seduces or exasperates them. Thus his cambricshirt with plaited cuffs was blown out by the wind in the opening of hiswaistcoat of grey ticking, and his broad-striped trousers disclosed atthe ankle nankeen boots with patent leather gaiters.
These were so polished that they reflected the grass. He trampled onhorses’s dung with them, one hand in the pocket of his jacket and hisstraw hat on one side.
“Besides,” added he, “when one lives in the country--”
“It’s waste of time,” said Emma.
“That is true,” replied Rodolphe. “To think that not one of these peopleis capable of understanding even the cut of a coat!”
Then they talked about provincial mediocrity, of the lives it crushed,the illusions lost there.
“And I too,” said Rodolphe, “am drifting into depression.”
“You!” she said in astonishment; “I thought you very light-hearted.”
“Ah! yes. I seem so, because in the midst of the world I know how towear the mask of a scoffer upon my face; and yet, how many a time at thesight of a cemetery by moonlight have I not asked myself whether it werenot better to join those sleeping there!”
“Oh! and your friends?” she said. “You do not think of them.”
“My friends! What friends? Have I any? Who cares for me?” And heaccompanied the last words with a kind of whistling of the lips.
But they were obliged to separate from each other because of a greatpile of chairs that a man was carrying behind them. He was so overladenwith them that one could only see the tips of his wooden shoes and theends of his two outstretched arms. It was Lestiboudois, the gravedigger,who was carrying the church chairs about amongst the people. Alive toall that concerned his interests, he had hit upon this means of turningthe show to account; and his idea was succeeding, for he no longer knewwhich way to turn. In fact, the villagers, who were hot, quarreled forthese seats, whose straw smelt of incense, and they leant against thethick backs, stained with the wax of candles, with a certain veneration.
Madame Bovary again took Rodolphe’s arm; he went on as if speaking tohimself--
“Yes, I have missed so many things. Always alone! Ah! if I had some aimin life, if I had met some love, if I had found someone! Oh, how I wouldhave spent all the energy of which I am capable, surmounted everything,overcome everything!”
“Yet it seems to me,” said Emma, “that you are not to be pitied.”
“Ah! you think so?” said Rodolphe.
“For, after all,” she went on, “you are free--” she hesitated, “rich--”
“Do not mock me,” he replied.
And she protested that she was not mocking him, when the report of acannon resounded. Immediately all began hustling one another pell-melltowards the village.
It was a false alarm. The prefect seemed not to be coming, and themembers of the jury felt much embarrassed, not knowing if they ought tobegin the meeting or still wait.
At last at the end of the Place a large hired landau appeared, drawn bytwo thin horses, which a coachman in a white hat was whipping lustily.Binet had only just time to shout, “Present arms!” and the colonel toimitate him. All ran towards the enclosure; everyone pushed forward. Afew even forgot their collars; but the equipage of the prefect seemedto anticipate the crowd, and the two yoked jades, trapesing in theirharness, came up at a little trot in front of the peristyle of the townhall at the very moment when the National Guard and firemen deployed,beating drums and marking time.
“Present!” shouted Binet.
“Halt!” shouted the colonel. “Left about, march.”
And after presenting arms, during which the clang of the band, lettingloose, rang out like a brass kettle rolling downstairs, all the gunswere lowered. Then was seen stepping down from the carriage a gentlemanin a short coat with silver braiding, with bald brow, and wearing a tuftof hair at the back of his head, of a sallow complexion and the mostbenign appearance. His eyes, very large and covered by heavy lids, werehalf-closed to look at the crowd, while at the same time he raised hissharp nose, and forced a smile upon his sunken mouth. He recognised themayor by his scarf, and explained to him that the prefect was not ableto come. He himself was a councillor at the prefecture; then he addeda few apologies. Monsieur Tuvache answered them with compliments; theother confessed himself nervous; and they remained thus, face to face,their foreheads almost touching, with the members of the jury all round,the municipal council, the notable personages, the National Guard andthe crowd. The councillor pressing his little cocked hat to hisbreast repeated his bows, while Tuvache, bent like a bow, also smiled,stammered, tried to say something, protested his devotion to themonarchy and the honour that was being done to Yonville.
Hippolyte, the groom from the inn, took the head of the horses from thecoachman, and, limping along with his club-foot, led them to the doorof the “Lion d’Or”, where a number of peasants collected to look at thecarriage. The drum beat, the howitzer thundered, and the gentlemen oneby one mounted the platform, where they sat down in red utrecht velvetarm-chairs that had been lent by Madame Tuvache.
All these people looked alike. Their fair flabby faces, somewhat tannedby the sun, were the colour of sweet cider, and their puffy whiskersemerged from stiff collars, kept up by white cravats with broad bows.All the waist-coats were of velvet, double-breasted; all the watcheshad, at the end of a long ribbon, an oval cornelian seal; everyonerested his two hands on his thighs, carefully stretching the stride oftheir trousers, whose unsponged glossy cloth shone more brilliantly thanthe leather of their heavy boots.
The ladies of the company stood at the back under the vestibule betweenthe pillars while the common herd was opposite, standing up or sittingon chairs. As a matter of fact, Lestiboudois had brought thither allthose that he had moved from the field, and he even kept running backevery minute to fetch others from the church. He caused such confusionwith this piece of business that one had great difficulty in getting tothe small steps of the platform.
“I think,” said Monsieur Lheureux to the chemist, who was passing to hisplace, “that they ought to have put up two Venetian masts with somethingrather severe and rich for ornaments; it would have been a very prettyeffect.”
“To be sure,” replied Homais; “but what can you expect? The mayor tookeverything on his own shoulders. He hasn’t much taste. Poor Tuvache! andhe is even completely destitute of what is called the genius of art.”
Rodolphe, meanwhile, with Madame Bovary, had gone up to the firstfloor of the town hall, to the “council-room,” and, as it was empty,he declared that they could enjoy the sight there more comfortably. Hefetched three stools from the round table under the bust of the monarch,and having carried them to one of the windows, they sat down by eachother.
There was commotion on the platform, long whisperings, much parleying.At last the councillor got up. They knew now that his name was Lieuvain,and in the crowd the name was passed from one to the other. After he hadcollated a few pages, and bent over them to see better, he began--
“Gentlemen! May I be permitted first of all (before addressing you onthe object of our meeting to-day, and this sentiment will, I am sure, beshared by you all), may I be permitted, I say, to pay a tribute to thehigher administration, to the government to the monarch, gentle men, oursovereign, to that beloved king, to whom no branch of public or privateprosperity is a matter of indifference, and who directs with a hand atonce so firm and wise the chariot of the state amid the incessant perilsof a stormy sea, knowing, moreover, how to make peace respected as wellas war, industry, commerce, agriculture, and the fine arts?”
“I ought,” said Rodolphe, “to get back a little further.”
“Why?” said Emma.
But at this moment the voice of the councillor rose to an extraordinarypitch. He declaimed--
“This is no longer the time, gentlemen, when civil discord ensanguinedour public places, when the landlord, the business-man, the working-manhimself, falling asleep at night, lying down to peaceful sleep, trembledlest he should be awakened suddenly by the noise of incendiary tocsins,when the most subversive doctrines audaciously sapped foundations.”
“Well, someone down there might see me,” Rodolphe resumed, “thenI should have to invent excuses for a fortnight; and with my badreputation--”
“Oh, you are slandering yourself,” said Emma.
“No! It is dreadful, I assure you.”
“But, gentlemen,” continued the councillor, “if, banishing from mymemory the remembrance of these sad pictures, I carry my eyes backto the actual situation of our dear country, what do I see there?Everywhere commerce and the arts are flourishing; everywhere new meansof communication, like so many new arteries in the body of the state,establish within it new relations. Our great industrial centres haverecovered all their activity; religion, more consolidated, smiles inall hearts; our ports are full, confidence is born again, and Francebreathes once more!”
“Besides,” added Rodolphe, “perhaps from the world’s point of view theyare right.”
“How so?” she asked.
“What!” said he. “Do you not know that there are souls constantlytormented? They need by turns to dream and to act, the purest passionsand the most turbulent joys, and thus they fling themselves into allsorts of fantasies, of follies.”
Then she looked at him as one looks at a traveller who has voyaged overstrange lands, and went on--
“We have not even this distraction, we poor women!”
“A sad distraction, for happiness isn’t found in it.”
“But is it ever found?” she asked.
“Yes; one day it comes,” he answered.
“And this is what you have understood,” said the councillor.
“You, farmers, agricultural labourers! you pacific pioneers of a workthat belongs wholly to civilization! you, men of progress and morality,you have understood, I say, that political storms are even moreredoubtable than atmospheric disturbances!”
“It comes one day,” repeated Rodolphe, “one day suddenly, and whenone is despairing of it. Then the horizon expands; it is as if a voicecried, ‘It is here!’ You feel the need of confiding the whole of yourlife, of giving everything, sacrificing everything to this being. Thereis no need for explanations; they understand one another. They have seeneach other in dreams!”
(And he looked at her.) “In fine, here it is, this treasure so soughtafter, here before you. It glitters, it flashes; yet one still doubts,one does not believe it; one remains dazzled, as if one went out fromdarkness into light.”
And as he ended Rodolphe suited the action to the word. He passed hishand over his face, like a man seized with giddiness. Then he let itfall on Emma’s. She took hers away.
“And who would be surprised at it, gentlemen? He only who is so blind,so plunged (I do not fear to say it), so plunged in the prejudicesof another age as still to misunderstand the spirit of agriculturalpopulations. Where, indeed, is to be found more patriotism than in thecountry, greater devotion to the public welfare, more intelligence, in aword? And, gentlemen, I do not mean that superficial intelligence,vain ornament of idle minds, but rather that profound and balancedintelligence that applies itself above all else to useful objects, thuscontributing to the good of all, to the common amelioration and tothe support of the state, born of respect for law and the practice ofduty--”
“Ah! again!” said Rodolphe. “Always ‘duty.’ I am sick of the word.They are a lot of old blockheads in flannel vests and of old women withfoot-warmers and rosaries who constantly drone into our ears ‘Duty,duty!’ Ah! by Jove! one’s duty is to feel what is great, cherish thebeautiful, and not accept all the conventions of society with theignominy that it imposes upon us.”
“Yet--yet--” objected Madame Bovary.
“No, no! Why cry out against the passions? Are they not the onebeautiful thing on the earth, the source of heroism, of enthusiasm, ofpoetry, music, the arts, of everything, in a word?”
“But one must,” said Emma, “to some extent bow to the opinion of theworld and accept its moral code.”
“Ah! but there are two,” he replied. “The small, the conventional, thatof men, that which constantly changes, that brays out so loudly, thatmakes such a commotion here below, of the earth earthly, like the massof imbeciles you see down there. But the other, the eternal, that isabout us and above, like the landscape that surrounds us, and the blueheavens that give us light.”
Monsieur Lieuvain had just wiped his mouth with a pocket-handkerchief.He continued--
“And what should I do here gentlemen, pointing out to you the usesof agriculture? Who supplies our wants? Who provides our means ofsubsistence? Is it not the agriculturist? The agriculturist, gentlemen,who, sowing with laborious hand the fertile furrows of the country,brings forth the corn, which, being ground, is made into a powder bymeans of ingenious machinery, comes out thence under the name of flour,and from there, transported to our cities, is soon delivered at thebaker’s, who makes it into food for poor and rich alike. Again, is itnot the agriculturist who fattens, for our clothes, his abundantflocks in the pastures? For how should we clothe ourselves, how nourishourselves, without the agriculturist? And, gentlemen, is it evennecessary to go so far for examples? Who has not frequently reflectedon all the momentous things that we get out of that modest animal, theornament of poultry-yards, that provides us at once with a soft pillowfor our bed, with succulent flesh for our tables, and eggs? But I shouldnever end if I were to enumerate one after the other all the differentproducts which the earth, well cultivated, like a generous mother,lavishes upon her children. Here it is the vine, elsewhere the appletree for cider, there colza, farther on cheeses and flax. Gentlemen, letus not forget flax, which has made such great strides of late years, andto which I will more particularly call your attention.”
He had no need to call it, for all the mouths of the multitude were wideopen, as if to drink in his words. Tuvache by his side listened to himwith staring eyes. Monsieur Derozerays from time to time softly closedhis eyelids, and farther on the chemist, with his son Napoleon betweenhis knees, put his hand behind his ear in order not to lose a syllable.The chins of the other members of the jury went slowly up and down intheir waistcoats in sign of approval. The firemen at the foot of theplatform rested on their bayonets; and Binet, motionless, stood without-turned elbows, the point of his sabre in the air. Perhaps he couldhear, but certainly he could see nothing, because of the visor of hishelmet, that fell down on his nose. His lieutenant, the youngest son ofMonsieur Tuvache, had a bigger one, for his was enormous, and shook onhis head, and from it an end of his cotton scarf peeped out. He smiledbeneath it with a perfectly infantine sweetness, and his pale littleface, whence drops were running, wore an expression of enjoyment andsleepiness.
The square as far as the houses was crowded with people. One saw folkleaning on their elbows at all the windows, others standing at doors,and Justin, in front of the chemist’s shop, seemed quite transfixed bythe sight of what he was looking at. In spite of the silence MonsieurLieuvain’s voice was lost in the air. It reached you in fragments ofphrases, and interrupted here and there by the creaking of chairs in thecrowd; then you suddenly heard the long bellowing of an ox, or else thebleating of the lambs, who answered one another at street corners. Infact, the cowherds and shepherds had driven their beasts thus far, andthese lowed from time to time, while with their tongues they tore downsome scrap of foliage that hung above their mouths.
Rodolphe had drawn nearer to Emma, and said to her in a low voice,speaking rapidly--
“Does not this conspiracy of the world revolt you? Is there a singlesentiment it does not condemn? The noblest instincts, the purestsympathies are persecuted, slandered; and if at length two poor souls domeet, all is so organised that they cannot blend together. Yet they willmake the attempt; they will flutter their wings; they will call uponeach other. Oh! no matter. Sooner or later, in six months, ten years,they will come together, will love; for fate has decreed it, and theyare born one for the other.”
His arms were folded across his knees, and thus lifting his face towardsEmma, close by her, he looked fixedly at her. She noticed in his eyessmall golden lines radiating from black pupils; she even smelt theperfume of the pomade that made his hair glossy.
Then a faintness came over her; she recalled the Viscount who hadwaltzed with her at Vaubyessard, and his beard exhaled like this air anodour of vanilla and citron, and mechanically she half-closed her eyesthe better to breathe it in. But in making this movement, as she leantback in her chair, she saw in the distance, right on the line of thehorizon, the old diligence, the “Hirondelle,” that was slowly descendingthe hill of Leux, dragging after it a long trail of dust. It was in thisyellow carriage that Léon had so often come back to her, and by thisroute down there that he had gone for ever. She fancied she saw himopposite at his windows; then all grew confused; clouds gathered; itseemed to her that she was again turning in the waltz under the light ofthe lustres on the arm of the Viscount, and that Léon was not far away,that he was coming; and yet all the time she was conscious of the scentof Rodolphe’s head by her side. This sweetness of sensation piercedthrough her old desires, and these, like grains of sand under a gustof wind, eddied to and fro in the subtle breath of the perfume whichsuffused her soul. She opened wide her nostrils several times to drinkin the freshness of the ivy round the capitals. She took off her gloves,she wiped her hands, then fanned her face with her handkerchief, whileathwart the throbbing of her temples she heard the murmur of thecrowd and the voice of the councillor intoning his phrases. Hesaid--“Continue, persevere; listen neither to the suggestions ofroutine, nor to the over-hasty councils of a rash empiricism.
“Apply yourselves, above all, to the amelioration of the soil, to goodmanures, to the development of the equine, bovine, ovine, and porcineraces. Let these shows be to you pacific arenas, where the victor inleaving it will hold forth a hand to the vanquished, and will fraternisewith him in the hope of better success. And you, aged servants, humbledomestics, whose hard labour no Government up to this day has taken intoconsideration, come hither to receive the reward of your silent virtues,and be assured that the state henceforward has its eye upon you; that itencourages you, protects you; that it will accede to your justdemands, and alleviate as much as in it lies the burden of your painfulsacrifices.”
Monsieur Lieuvain then sat down; Monsieur Derozerays got up, beginninganother speech. His was not perhaps so florid as that of the councillor,but it recommended itself by a more direct style, that is to say, bymore special knowledge and more elevated considerations. Thus the praiseof the Government took up less space in it; religion and agriculturemore. He showed in it the relations of these two, and how they hadalways contributed to civilisation. Rodolphe with Madame Bovary wastalking dreams, presentiments, magnetism. Going back to the cradle ofsociety, the orator painted those fierce times when men lived on acornsin the heart of woods. Then they had left off the skins of beasts, hadput on cloth, tilled the soil, planted the vine. Was this a good, andin this discovery was there not more of injury than of gain? MonsieurDerozerays set himself this problem. From magnetism little by littleRodolphe had come to affinities, and while the president was citingCincinnatus and his plough, Diocletian, planting his cabbages, and theEmperors of China inaugurating the year by the sowing of seed, theyoung man was explaining to the young woman that these irresistibleattractions find their cause in some previous state of existence.
“Thus we,” he said, “why did we come to know one another? What chancewilled it? It was because across the infinite, like two streams thatflow but to unite; our special bents of mind had driven us towards eachother.”
And he seized her hand; she did not withdraw it.
“For good farming generally!” cried the president.
“Just now, for example, when I went to your house.”
“To Monsieur Bizat of Quincampoix.”
“Did I know I should accompany you?”
“Seventy francs.”
“A hundred times I wished to go; and I followed you--I remained.”
“Manures!”
“And I shall remain to-night, to-morrow, all other days, all my life!”
“To Monsieur Caron of Argueil, a gold medal!”
“For I have never in the society of any other person found so complete acharm.”
“To Monsieur Bain of Givry-Saint-Martin.”
“And I shall carry away with me the remembrance of you.”
“For a merino ram!”
“But you will forget me; I shall pass away like a shadow.”
“To Monsieur Belot of Notre-Dame.”
“Oh, no! I shall be something in your thought, in your life, shall Inot?”
“Porcine race; prizes--equal, to Messrs. Leherisse and Cullembourg,sixty francs!”
Rodolphe was pressing her hand, and he felt it all warm and quiveringlike a captive dove that wants to fly away; but, whether she was tryingto take it away or whether she was answering his pressure; she made amovement with her fingers. He exclaimed--
“Oh, I thank you! You do not repulse me! You are good! You understandthat I am yours! Let me look at you; let me contemplate you!”
A gust of wind that blew in at the window ruffled the cloth on thetable, and in the square below all the great caps of the peasant womenwere uplifted by it like the wings of white butterflies fluttering.
“Use of oil-cakes,” continued the president. He was hurrying on:“Flemish manure-flax-growing-drainage-long leases-domestic service.”
Rodolphe was no longer speaking. They looked at one another. A supremedesire made their dry lips tremble, and wearily, without an effort,their fingers intertwined.
“Catherine Nicaise Elizabeth Leroux, of Sassetot-la-Guerriere, forfifty-four years of service at the same farm, a silver medal--value,twenty-five francs!”
“Where is Catherine Leroux?” repeated the councillor.
She did not present herself, and one could hear voices whispering--
“Go up!”
“Don’t be afraid!”
“Oh, how stupid she is!”
“Well, is she there?” cried Tuvache.
“Yes; here she is.”
“Then let her come up!”
Then there came forward on the platform a little old woman with timidbearing, who seemed to shrink within her poor clothes. On her feet shewore heavy wooden clogs, and from her hips hung a large blue apron. Herpale face framed in a borderless cap was more wrinkled than a witheredrusset apple. And from the sleeves of her red jacket looked out twolarge hands with knotty joints, the dust of barns, the potash of washingthe grease of wools had so encrusted, roughened, hardened these thatthey seemed dirty, although they had been rinsed in clear water; andby dint of long service they remained half open, as if to bear humblewitness for themselves of so much suffering endured. Something ofmonastic rigidity dignified her face. Nothing of sadness or of emotionweakened that pale look. In her constant living with animals she hadcaught their dumbness and their calm. It was the first time that shefound herself in the midst of so large a company, and inwardly scared bythe flags, the drums, the gentlemen in frock-coats, and the order of thecouncillor, she stood motionless, not knowing whether to advance or runaway, nor why the crowd was pushing her and the jury were smiling ather.
Thus stood before these radiant bourgeois this half-century ofservitude.
“Approach, venerable Catherine Nicaise Elizabeth Leroux!” said thecouncillor, who had taken the list of prize-winners from the president;and, looking at the piece of paper and the old woman by turns, herepeated in a fatherly tone--“Approach! approach!”
“Are you deaf?” said Tuvache, fidgeting in his armchair; and he beganshouting in her ear, “Fifty-four years of service. A silver medal!Twenty-five francs! For you!”
Then, when she had her medal, she looked at it, and a smile of beatitudespread over her face; and as she walked away they could hear hermuttering “I’ll give it to our cure up home, to say some masses for me!”
“What fanaticism!” exclaimed the chemist, leaning across to the notary.
The meeting was over, the crowd dispersed, and now that the speeches hadbeen read, each one fell back into his place again, and everything intothe old grooves; the masters bullied the servants, and these struck theanimals, indolent victors, going back to the stalls, a green-crown ontheir horns.
The National Guards, however, had gone up to the first floor of thetown hall with buns spitted on their bayonets, and the drummer of thebattalion carried a basket with bottles. Madame Bovary took Rodolphe’sarm; he saw her home; they separated at her door; then he walked aboutalone in the meadow while he waited for the time of the banquet.
The feast was long, noisy, ill served; the guests were so crowded thatthey could hardly move their elbows; and the narrow planks used forforms almost broke down under their weight. They ate hugely. Each onestuffed himself on his own account. Sweat stood on every brow, and awhitish steam, like the vapour of a stream on an autumn morning, floatedabove the table between the hanging lamps. Rodolphe, leaning againstthe calico of the tent was thinking so earnestly of Emma that he heardnothing. Behind him on the grass the servants were piling up the dirtyplates, his neighbours were talking; he did not answer them; they filledhis glass, and there was silence in his thoughts in spite of the growingnoise. He was dreaming of what she had said, of the line of her lips;her face, as in a magic mirror, shone on the plates of the shakos, thefolds of her gown fell along the walls, and days of love unrolled to allinfinity before him in the vistas of the future.
He saw her again in the evening during the fireworks, but she was withher husband, Madame Homais, and the druggist, who was worrying about thedanger of stray rockets, and every moment he left the company to go andgive some advice to Binet.
The pyrotechnic pieces sent to Monsieur Tuvache had, through an excessof caution, been shut up in his cellar, and so the damp powder wouldnot light, and the principal set piece, that was to represent a dragonbiting his tail, failed completely. Now and then a meagre Roman-candlewent off; then the gaping crowd sent up a shout that mingled with thecry of the women, whose waists were being squeezed in the darkness. Emmasilently nestled against Charles’s shoulder; then, raising her chin, shewatched the luminous rays of the rockets against the dark sky. Rodolphegazed at her in the light of the burning lanterns.
They went out one by one. The stars shone out. A few crops of rain beganto fall. She knotted her fichu round her bare head.
At this moment the councillor’s carriage came out from the inn.
His coachman, who was drunk, suddenly dozed off, and one could see fromthe distance, above the hood, between the two lanterns, the mass of hisbody, that swayed from right to left with the giving of the traces.
“Truly,” said the druggist, “one ought to proceed most rigorouslyagainst drunkenness! I should like to see written up weekly at the doorof the town hall on a board _ad hoc_[13] the names of all those whoduring the week got intoxicated on alcohol. Besides, with regard tostatistics, one would thus have, as it were, public records that onecould refer to in case of need. But excuse me!”
[13] Specifically for that.
And he once more ran off to the captain. The latter was going back tosee his lathe again.
“Perhaps you would not do ill,” Homais said to him, “to send one of yourmen, or to go yourself--”
“Leave me alone!” answered the tax-collector. “It’s all right!”
“Do not be uneasy,” said the druggist, when he returned to his friends.“Monsieur Binet has assured me that all precautions have been taken. Nosparks have fallen; the pumps are full. Let us go to rest.”
“Ma foi! I want it,” said Madame Homais, yawning at large. “But nevermind; we’ve had a beautiful day for our fete.”
Rodolphe repeated in a low voice, and with a tender look, “Oh, yes! verybeautiful!”
And having bowed to one another, they separated.
Two days later, in the “Final de Rouen,” there was a long article on theshow. Homais had composed it with verve the very next morning.
“Why these festoons, these flowers, these garlands? Whither hurries thiscrowd like the waves of a furious sea under the torrents of a tropicalsun pouring its heat upon our heads?”
Then he spoke of the condition of the peasants. Certainly the Governmentwas doing much, but not enough. “Courage!” he cried to it; “a thousandreforms are indispensable; let us accomplish them!” Then touching onthe entry of the councillor, he did not forget “the martial air of ourmilitia;” nor “our most merry village maidens;” nor the “bald-headed oldmen like patriarchs who were there, and of whom some, the remnants ofour phalanxes, still felt their hearts beat at the manly sound of thedrums.” He cited himself among the first of the members of the jury,and he even called attention in a note to the fact that Monsieur Homais,chemist, had sent a memoir on cider to the agricultural society.
When he came to the distribution of the prizes, he painted the joy ofthe prize-winners in dithyrambic strophes. “The father embraced the son,the brother the brother, the husband his consort. More than one showedhis humble medal with pride; and no doubt when he got home to his goodhousewife, he hung it up weeping on the modest walls of his cot.
“About six o’clock a banquet prepared in the meadow of Monsieur Leigeardbrought together the principal personages of the fete. The greatestcordiality reigned here. Divers toasts were proposed: MonsieurLieuvain, the King; Monsieur Tuvache, the Prefect; Monsieur Derozerays,Agriculture; Monsieur Homais, Industry and the Fine Arts, those twinsisters; Monsieur Leplichey, Progress. In the evening some brilliantfireworks on a sudden illumined the air. One would have called it averitable kaleidoscope, a real operatic scene; and for a moment ourlittle locality might have thought itself transported into the midst ofa dream of the ‘Thousand and One Nights.’ Let us state that no untowardevent disturbed this family meeting.” And he added “Only the absenceof the clergy was remarked. No doubt the priests understand progress inanother fashion. Just as you please, messieurs the followers of Loyola!”
Chapter Nine
Six weeks passed. Rodolphe did not come again. At last one evening heappeared.
The day after the show he had said to himself--“We mustn’t go back toosoon; that would be a mistake.”
And at the end of a week he had gone off hunting. After the hunting hehad thought it was too late, and then he reasoned thus--
“If from the first day she loved me, she must from impatience to see meagain love me more. Let’s go on with it!”
And he knew that his calculation had been right when, on entering theroom, he saw Emma turn pale.
She was alone. The day was drawing in. The small muslin curtain alongthe windows deepened the twilight, and the gilding of the barometer, onwhich the rays of the sun fell, shone in the looking-glass between themeshes of the coral.
Rodolphe remained standing, and Emma hardly answered his firstconventional phrases.
“I,” he said, “have been busy. I have been ill.”
“Seriously?” she cried.
“Well,” said Rodolphe, sitting down at her side on a footstool, “no; itwas because I did not want to come back.”
“Why?”
“Can you not guess?”
He looked at her again, but so hard that she lowered her head, blushing.He went on--
“Emma!”
“Sir,” she said, drawing back a little.
“Ah! you see,” replied he in a melancholy voice, “that I was right notto come back; for this name, this name that fills my whole soul, andthat escaped me, you forbid me to use! Madame Bovary! why all theworld calls you thus! Besides, it is not your name; it is the name ofanother!”
He repeated, “of another!” And he hid his face in his hands.
“Yes, I think of you constantly. The memory of you drives me to despair.Ah! forgive me! I will leave you! Farewell! I will go far away, so farthat you will never hear of me again; and yet--to-day--I know not whatforce impelled me towards you. For one does not struggle against Heaven;one cannot resist the smile of angels; one is carried away by that whichis beautiful, charming, adorable.”
It was the first time that Emma had heard such words spoken to herself,and her pride, like one who reposes bathed in warmth, expanded softlyand fully at this glowing language.
“But if I did not come,” he continued, “if I could not see you, at leastI have gazed long on all that surrounds you. At night-every night-Iarose; I came hither; I watched your house, its glimmering in the moon,the trees in the garden swaying before your window, and the little lamp,a gleam shining through the window-panes in the darkness. Ah! you neverknew that there, so near you, so far from you, was a poor wretch!”
She turned towards him with a sob.
“Oh, you are good!” she said.
“No, I love you, that is all! You do not doubt that! Tell me--oneword--only one word!”
And Rodolphe imperceptibly glided from the footstool to the ground; buta sound of wooden shoes was heard in the kitchen, and he noticed thedoor of the room was not closed.
“How kind it would be of you,” he went on, rising, “if you would humoura whim of mine.” It was to go over her house; he wanted to know it; andMadame Bovary seeing no objection to this, they both rose, when Charlescame in.
“Good morning, doctor,” Rodolphe said to him.
The doctor, flattered at this unexpected title, launched out intoobsequious phrases. Of this the other took advantage to pull himselftogether a little.
“Madame was speaking to me,” he then said, “about her health.”
Charles interrupted him; he had indeed a thousand anxieties; his wife’spalpitations of the heart were beginning again. Then Rodolphe asked ifriding would not be good.
“Certainly! excellent! just the thing! There’s an idea! You ought tofollow it up.”
And as she objected that she had no horse, Monsieur Rodolphe offeredone. She refused his offer; he did not insist. Then to explain his visithe said that his ploughman, the man of the blood-letting, still sufferedfrom giddiness.
“I’ll call around,” said Bovary.
“No, no! I’ll send him to you; we’ll come; that will be more convenientfor you.”
“Ah! very good! I thank you.”
And as soon as they were alone, “Why don’t you accept MonsieurBoulanger’s kind offer?”
She assumed a sulky air, invented a thousand excuses, and finallydeclared that perhaps it would look odd.
“Well, what the deuce do I care for that?” said Charles, making apirouette. “Health before everything! You are wrong.”
“And how do you think I can ride when I haven’t got a habit?”
“You must order one,” he answered.
The riding-habit decided her.
When the habit was ready, Charles wrote to Monsieur Boulanger that hiswife was at his command, and that they counted on his good-nature.
The next day at noon Rodolphe appeared at Charles’s door with twosaddle-horses. One had pink rosettes at his ears and a deerskinside-saddle.
Rodolphe had put on high soft boots, saying to himself that no doubt shehad never seen anything like them. In fact, Emma was charmed with hisappearance as he stood on the landing in his great velvet coat and whitecorduroy breeches. She was ready; she was waiting for him.
Justin escaped from the chemist’s to see her start, and the chemist alsocame out. He was giving Monsieur Boulanger a little good advice.
“An accident happens so easily. Be careful! Your horses perhaps aremettlesome.”
She heard a noise above her; it was Félicité drumming on the windowpanesto amuse little Berthe. The child blew her a kiss; her mother answeredwith a wave of her whip.
“A pleasant ride!” cried Monsieur Homais. “Prudence! above all,prudence!” And he flourished his newspaper as he saw them disappear.
As soon as he felt the ground, Emma’s horse set off at a gallop.
Rodolphe galloped by her side. Now and then they exchanged a word. Herfigure slightly bent, her hand well up, and her right arm stretched out,she gave herself up to the cadence of the movement that rocked her inher saddle. At the bottom of the hill Rodolphe gave his horse its head;they started together at a bound, then at the top suddenly the horsesstopped, and her large blue veil fell about her.
It was early in October. There was fog over the land. Hazy cloudshovered on the horizon between the outlines of the hills; others, rentasunder, floated up and disappeared. Sometimes through a rift in theclouds, beneath a ray of sunshine, gleamed from afar the roots ofYonville, with the gardens at the water’s edge, the yards, the walls andthe church steeple. Emma half closed her eyes to pick out her house, andnever had this poor village where she lived appeared so small. From theheight on which they were the whole valley seemed an immense pale lakesending off its vapour into the air. Clumps of trees here and therestood out like black rocks, and the tall lines of the poplars that roseabove the mist were like a beach stirred by the wind.
By the side, on the turf between the pines, a brown light shimmeredin the warm atmosphere. The earth, ruddy like the powder of tobacco,deadened the noise of their steps, and with the edge of their shoes thehorses as they walked kicked the fallen fir cones in front of them.
Rodolphe and Emma thus went along the skirt of the wood. She turnedaway from time to time to avoid his look, and then she saw only the pinetrunks in lines, whose monotonous succession made her a little giddy.The horses were panting; the leather of the saddles creaked.
Just as they were entering the forest the sun shone out.
“God protects us!” said Rodolphe.
“Do you think so?” she said.
“Forward! forward!” he continued.
He “tchk’d” with his tongue. The two beasts set off at a trot.
Long ferns by the roadside caught in Emma’s stirrup.
Rodolphe leant forward and removed them as they rode along. At othertimes, to turn aside the branches, he passed close to her, and Emma felthis knee brushing against her leg. The sky was now blue, the leaves nolonger stirred. There were spaces full of heather in flower, and plotsof violets alternated with the confused patches of the trees that weregrey, fawn, or golden coloured, according to the nature of their leaves.Often in the thicket was heard the fluttering of wings, or else thehoarse, soft cry of the ravens flying off amidst the oaks.
They dismounted. Rodolphe fastened up the horses. She walked on infront on the moss between the paths. But her long habit got in her way,although she held it up by the skirt; and Rodolphe, walking behind her,saw between the black cloth and the black shoe the fineness of her whitestocking, that seemed to him as if it were a part of her nakedness.
She stopped. “I am tired,” she said.
“Come, try again,” he went on. “Courage!”
Then some hundred paces farther on she again stopped, and through herveil, that fell sideways from her man’s hat over her hips, her faceappeared in a bluish transparency as if she were floating under azurewaves.
“But where are we going?”
He did not answer. She was breathing irregularly. Rodolphe looked roundhim biting his moustache. They came to a larger space where the coppicehad been cut. They sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree, and Rodolphebegan speaking to her of his love. He did not begin by frightening herwith compliments. He was calm, serious, melancholy.
Emma listened to him with bowed head, and stirred the bits of wood onthe ground with the tip of her foot. But at the words, “Are not ourdestinies now one?”
“Oh, no!” she replied. “You know that well. It is impossible!” She roseto go. He seized her by the wrist. She stopped. Then, having gazedat him for a few moments with an amorous and humid look, she saidhurriedly--
“Ah! do not speak of it again! Where are the horses? Let us go back.”
He made a gesture of anger and annoyance. She repeated:
“Where are the horses? Where are the horses?”
Then smiling a strange smile, his pupil fixed, his teeth set, headvanced with outstretched arms. She recoiled trembling. She stammered:
“Oh, you frighten me! You hurt me! Let me go!”
“If it must be,” he went on, his face changing; and he again becamerespectful, caressing, timid. She gave him her arm. They went back. Hesaid--
“What was the matter with you? Why? I do not understand. You weremistaken, no doubt. In my soul you are as a Madonna on a pedestal, ina place lofty, secure, immaculate. But I need you to live! I must haveyour eyes, your voice, your thought! Be my friend, my sister, my angel!”
And he put out his arm round her waist. She feebly tried to disengageherself. He supported her thus as they walked along.
But they heard the two horses browsing on the leaves.
“Oh! one moment!” said Rodolphe. “Do not let us go! Stay!”
He drew her farther on to a small pool where duckweeds made a greennesson the water. Faded water lilies lay motionless between the reeds.At the noise of their steps in the grass, frogs jumped away to hidethemselves.
“I am wrong! I am wrong!” she said. “I am mad to listen to you!”
“Why? Emma! Emma!”
“Oh, Rodolphe!” said the young woman slowly, leaning on his shoulder.
The cloth of her habit caught against the velvet of his coat. She threwback her white neck, swelling with a sigh, and faltering, in tears, witha long shudder and hiding her face, she gave herself up to him--
The shades of night were falling; the horizontal sun passing between thebranches dazzled the eyes. Here and there around her, in the leavesor on the ground, trembled luminous patches, as it hummingbirds flyingabout had scattered their feathers. Silence was everywhere; somethingsweet seemed to come forth from the trees; she felt her heart, whosebeating had begun again, and the blood coursing through her flesh like astream of milk. Then far away, beyond the wood, on the other hills, sheheard a vague prolonged cry, a voice which lingered, and in silence sheheard it mingling like music with the last pulsations of her throbbingnerves. Rodolphe, a cigar between his lips, was mending with hispenknife one of the two broken bridles.
They returned to Yonville by the same road. On the mud they saw againthe traces of their horses side by side, the same thickets, the samestones to the grass; nothing around them seemed changed; and yet for hersomething had happened more stupendous than if the mountains had movedin their places. Rodolphe now and again bent forward and took her handto kiss it.
She was charming on horseback--upright, with her slender waist, her kneebent on the mane of her horse, her face somewhat flushed by the freshair in the red of the evening.
On entering Yonville she made her horse prance in the road. Peoplelooked at her from the windows.
At dinner her husband thought she looked well, but she pretended not tohear him when he inquired about her ride, and she remained sitting therewith her elbow at the side of her plate between the two lighted candles.
“Emma!” he said.
“What?”
“Well, I spent the afternoon at Monsieur Alexandre’s. He has an old cob,still very fine, only a little broken-kneed, and that could be bought; Iam sure, for a hundred crowns.” He added, “And thinking it might pleaseyou, I have bespoken it--bought it. Have I done right? Do tell me?”
She nodded her head in assent; then a quarter of an hour later--
“Are you going out to-night?” she asked.
“Yes. Why?”
“Oh, nothing, nothing, my dear!”
And as soon as she had got rid of Charles she went and shut herself upin her room.
At first she felt stunned; she saw the trees, the paths, the ditches,Rodolphe, and she again felt the pressure of his arm, while the leavesrustled and the reeds whistled.
But when she saw herself in the glass she wondered at her face. Neverhad her eyes been so large, so black, of so profound a depth. Somethingsubtle about her being transfigured her. She repeated, “I have a lover!a lover!” delighting at the idea as if a second puberty had come to her.So at last she was to know those joys of love, that fever of happinessof which she had despaired! She was entering upon marvels where allwould be passion, ecstasy, delirium. An azure infinity encompassedher, the heights of sentiment sparkled under her thought, and ordinaryexistence appeared only afar off, down below in the shade, through theinterspaces of these heights.
Then she recalled the heroines of the books that she had read, and thelyric legion of these adulterous women began to sing in her memory withthe voice of sisters that charmed her. She became herself, as it were,an actual part of these imaginings, and realised the love-dream of heryouth as she saw herself in this type of amorous women whom she hadso envied. Besides, Emma felt a satisfaction of revenge. Had she notsuffered enough? But now she triumphed, and the love so long pent upburst forth in full joyous bubblings. She tasted it without remorse,without anxiety, without trouble.
The day following passed with a new sweetness. They made vows to oneanother She told him of her sorrows. Rodolphe interrupted her withkisses; and she looking at him through half-closed eyes, asked him tocall her again by her name--to say that he loved her They were in theforest, as yesterday, in the shed of some woodenshoe maker. The wallswere of straw, and the roof so low they had to stoop. They were seatedside by side on a bed of dry leaves.
From that day forth they wrote to one another regularly every evening.Emma placed her letter at the end of the garden, by the river, in afissure of the wall. Rodolphe came to fetch it, and put another there,that she always found fault with as too short.
One morning, when Charles had gone out before day break, she was seizedwith the fancy to see Rodolphe at once. She would go quickly to LaHuchette, stay there an hour, and be back again at Yonville whileeveryone was still asleep. This idea made her pant with desire, and shesoon found herself in the middle of the field, walking with rapid steps,without looking behind her.
Day was just breaking. Emma from afar recognised her lover’s house. Itstwo dove-tailed weathercocks stood out black against the pale dawn.
Beyond the farmyard there was a detached building that she thought mustbe the château She entered--it was if the doors at her approach hadopened wide of their own accord. A large straight staircase led up tothe corridor. Emma raised the latch of a door, and suddenly at the endof the room she saw a man sleeping. It was Rodolphe. She uttered a cry.
“You here? You here?” he repeated. “How did you manage to come? Ah! yourdress is damp.”
“I love you,” she answered, throwing her arms about his neck.
This first piece of daring successful, now every time Charles went outearly Emma dressed quickly and slipped on tiptoe down the steps that ledto the waterside.
But when the plank for the cows was taken up, she had to go by the wallsalongside of the river; the bank was slippery; in order not to fallshe caught hold of the tufts of faded wallflowers. Then she went acrossploughed fields, in which she sank, stumbling; and clogging her thinshoes. Her scarf, knotted round her head, fluttered to the wind in themeadows. She was afraid of the oxen; she began to run; she arrived outof breath, with rosy cheeks, and breathing out from her whole person afresh perfume of sap, of verdure, of the open air. At this hour Rodolphestill slept. It was like a spring morning coming into his room.
The yellow curtains along the windows let a heavy, whitish light entersoftly. Emma felt about, opening and closing her eyes, while the dropsof dew hanging from her hair formed, as it were, a topaz aureole aroundher face. Rodolphe, laughing, drew her to him, and pressed her to hisbreast.
Then she examined the apartment, opened the drawers of the tables,combed her hair with his comb, and looked at herself in hisshaving-glass. Often she even put between her teeth the big pipe thatlay on the table by the bed, amongst lemons and pieces of sugar near abottle of water.
It took them a good quarter of an hour to say goodbye. Then Emma cried.She would have wished never to leave Rodolphe. Something stronger thanherself forced her to him; so much so, that one day, seeing her comeunexpectedly, he frowned as one put out.
“What is the matter with you?” she said. “Are you ill? Tell me!”
At last he declared with a serious air that her visits were becomingimprudent--that she was compromising herself.
Chapter Ten
Gradually Rodolphe’s fears took possession of her. At first, love hadintoxicated her; and she had thought of nothing beyond. But now that hewas indispensable to her life, she feared to lose anything of this, oreven that it should be disturbed. When she came back from his house shelooked all about her, anxiously watching every form that passed in thehorizon, and every village window from which she could be seen. Shelistened for steps, cries, the noise of the ploughs, and she stoppedshort, white, and trembling more than the aspen leaves swaying overhead.
One morning as she was thus returning, she suddenly thought she saw thelong barrel of a carbine that seemed to be aimed at her. It stuck outsideways from the end of a small tub half-buried in the grass on theedge of a ditch. Emma, half-fainting with terror, nevertheless walkedon, and a man stepped out of the tub like a Jack-in-the-box. He hadgaiters buckled up to the knees, his cap pulled down over his eyes,trembling lips, and a red nose. It was Captain Binet lying in ambush forwild ducks.
“You ought to have called out long ago!” he exclaimed; “When one sees agun, one should always give warning.”
The tax-collector was thus trying to hide the fright he had had, fora prefectorial order having prohibited duckhunting except in boats,Monsieur Binet, despite his respect for the laws, was infringing them,and so he every moment expected to see the rural guard turn up. Butthis anxiety whetted his pleasure, and, all alone in his tub, hecongratulated himself on his luck and on his cuteness. At sight ofEmma he seemed relieved from a great weight, and at once entered upon aconversation.
“It isn’t warm; it’s nipping.”
Emma answered nothing. He went on--
“And you’re out so early?”
“Yes,” she said stammering; “I am just coming from the nurse where mychild is.”
“Ah! very good! very good! For myself, I am here, just as you see me,since break of day; but the weather is so muggy, that unless one had thebird at the mouth of the gun--”
“Good evening, Monsieur Binet,” she interrupted him, turning on herheel.
“Your servant, madame,” he replied drily; and he went back into his tub.
Emma regretted having left the tax-collector so abruptly. No doubt hewould form unfavourable conjectures. The story about the nurse was theworst possible excuse, everyone at Yonville knowing that the littleBovary had been at home with her parents for a year. Besides, no onewas living in this direction; this path led only to La Huchette. Binet,then, would guess whence she came, and he would not keep silence; hewould talk, that was certain. She remained until evening racking herbrain with every conceivable lying project, and had constantly beforeher eyes that imbecile with the game-bag.
Charles after dinner, seeing her gloomy, proposed, by way ofdistraction, to take her to the chemist’s, and the first person shecaught sight of in the shop was the taxcollector again. He was standingin front of the counter, lit up by the gleams of the red bottle, and wassaying--
“Please give me half an ounce of vitriol.”
“Justin,” cried the druggist, “bring us the sulphuric acid.” Then toEmma, who was going up to Madame Homais’ room, “No, stay here; it isn’tworth while going up; she is just coming down. Warm yourself at thestove in the meantime. Excuse me. Good-day, doctor,” (for the chemistmuch enjoyed pronouncing the word “doctor,” as if addressing another byit reflected on himself some of the grandeur that he found in it). “Now,take care not to upset the mortars! You’d better fetch some chairs fromthe little room; you know very well that the arm-chairs are not to betaken out of the drawing-room.”
And to put his arm-chair back in its place he was darting away from thecounter, when Binet asked him for half an ounce of sugar acid.
“Sugar acid!” said the chemist contemptuously, “don’t know it; I’mignorant of it! But perhaps you want oxalic acid. It is oxalic acid,isn’t it?”
Binet explained that he wanted a corrosive to make himself somecopperwater with which to remove rust from his hunting things.
Emma shuddered. The chemist began saying--
“Indeed the weather is not propitious on account of the damp.”
“Nevertheless,” replied the tax-collector, with a sly look, “there arepeople who like it.”
She was stifling.
“And give me--”
“Will he never go?” thought she.
“Half an ounce of resin and turpentine, four ounces of yellow wax,and three half ounces of animal charcoal, if you please, to clean thevarnished leather of my togs.”
The druggist was beginning to cut the wax when Madame Homais appeared,Irma in her arms, Napoleon by her side, and Athalie following. She satdown on the velvet seat by the window, and the lad squatted down on afootstool, while his eldest sister hovered round the jujube box nearher papa. The latter was filling funnels and corking phials, sticking onlabels, making up parcels. Around him all were silent; only from timeto time, were heard the weights jingling in the balance, and a few lowwords from the chemist giving directions to his pupil.
“And how’s the little woman?” suddenly asked Madame Homais.
“Silence!” exclaimed her husband, who was writing down some figures inhis waste-book.
“Why didn’t you bring her?” she went on in a low voice.
“Hush! hush!” said Emma, pointing with her finger to the druggist.
But Binet, quite absorbed in looking over his bill, had probably heardnothing. At last he went out. Then Emma, relieved, uttered a deep sigh.
“How hard you are breathing!” said Madame Homais.
“Well, you see, it’s rather warm,” she replied.
So the next day they talked over how to arrange their rendezvous. Emmawanted to bribe her servant with a present, but it would be better tofind some safe house at Yonville. Rodolphe promised to look for one.
All through the winter, three or four times a week, in the dead of nighthe came to the garden. Emma had on purpose taken away the key of thegate, which Charles thought lost.
To call her, Rodolphe threw a sprinkle of sand at the shutters. Shejumped up with a start; but sometimes he had to wait, for Charles had amania for chatting by the fireside, and he would not stop. She was wildwith impatience; if her eyes could have done it, she would have hurledhim out at the window. At last she would begin to undress, then take upa book, and go on reading very quietly as if the book amused her. ButCharles, who was in bed, called to her to come too.
“Come, now, Emma,” he said, “it is time.”
“Yes, I am coming,” she answered.
Then, as the candles dazzled him; he turned to the wall and fell asleep.She escaped, smiling, palpitating, undressed. Rodolphe had a largecloak; he wrapped her in it, and putting his arm round her waist, hedrew her without a word to the end of the garden.
It was in the arbour, on the same seat of old sticks where formerly Léonhad looked at her so amorously on the summer evenings. She never thoughtof him now.
The stars shone through the leafless jasmine branches. Behind them theyheard the river flowing, and now and again on the bank the rustlingof the dry reeds. Masses of shadow here and there loomed out in thedarkness, and sometimes, vibrating with one movement, they rose up andswayed like immense black waves pressing forward to engulf them. Thecold of the nights made them clasp closer; the sighs of their lipsseemed to them deeper; their eyes that they could hardly see, larger;and in the midst of the silence low words were spoken that fell ontheir souls sonorous, crystalline, and that reverberated in multipliedvibrations.
When the night was rainy, they took refuge in the consulting-roombetween the cart-shed and the stable. She lighted one of the kitchencandles that she had hidden behind the books. Rodolphe settled downthere as if at home. The sight of the library, of the bureau, of thewhole apartment, in fine, excited his merriment, and he could notrefrain from making jokes about Charles, which rather embarrassed Emma.She would have liked to see him more serious, and even on occasionsmore dramatic; as, for example, when she thought she heard a noise ofapproaching steps in the alley.
“Someone is coming!” she said.
He blew out the light.
“Have you your pistols?”
“Why?”
“Why, to defend yourself,” replied Emma.
“From your husband? Oh, poor devil!” And Rodolphe finished his sentencewith a gesture that said, “I could crush him with a flip of my finger.”
She was wonder-stricken at his bravery, although she felt in it a sortof indecency and a naive coarseness that scandalised her.
Rodolphe reflected a good deal on the affair of the pistols. If she hadspoken seriously, it was very ridiculous, he thought, even odious; forhe had no reason to hate the good Charles, not being what is calleddevoured by jealousy; and on this subject Emma had taken a great vowthat he did not think in the best of taste.
Besides, she was growing very sentimental. She had insisted onexchanging miniatures; they had cut off handfuls of hair, and now shewas asking for a ring--a real wedding-ring, in sign of an eternal union.She often spoke to him of the evening chimes, of the voices of nature.Then she talked to him of her mother--hers! and of his mother--his!Rodolphe had lost his twenty years ago. Emma none the less consoledhim with caressing words as one would have done a lost child, and shesometimes even said to him, gazing at the moon--
“I am sure that above there together they approve of our love.”
But she was so pretty. He had possessed so few women of suchingenuousness. This love without debauchery was a new experience forhim, and, drawing him out of his lazy habits, caressed at once his prideand his sensuality. Emma’s enthusiasm, which his bourgeois good sensedisdained, seemed to him in his heart of hearts charming, since itwas lavished on him. Then, sure of being loved, he no longer kept upappearances, and insensibly his ways changed.
He had no longer, as formerly, words so gentle that they made her cry,nor passionate caresses that made her mad, so that their great love,which engrossed her life, seemed to lessen beneath her like the water ofa stream absorbed into its channel, and she could see the bed of it.She would not believe it; she redoubled in tenderness, and Rodolpheconcealed his indifference less and less.
She did not know if she regretted having yielded to him, or whether shedid not wish, on the contrary, to enjoy him the more. The humiliationof feeling herself weak was turning to rancour, tempered by theirvoluptuous pleasures. It was not affection; it was like a continualseduction. He subjugated her; she almost feared him.
Appearances, nevertheless, were calmer than ever, Rodolphe havingsucceeded in carrying out the adultery after his own fancy; and at theend of six months, when the spring-time came, they were to one anotherlike a married couple, tranquilly keeping up a domestic flame.
It was the time of year when old Rouault sent his turkey in remembranceof the setting of his leg. The present always arrived with a letter.Emma cut the string that tied it to the basket, and read the followinglines:--
“My Dear Children--I hope this will find you well, and that this onewill be as good as the others. For it seems to me a little more tender,if I may venture to say so, and heavier. But next time, for a change,I’ll give you a turkeycock, unless you have a preference for some dabs;and send me back the hamper, if you please, with the two old ones. Ihave had an accident with my cart-sheds, whose covering flew off onewindy night among the trees. The harvest has not been overgood either.Finally, I don’t know when I shall come to see you. It is so difficultnow to leave the house since I am alone, my poor Emma.”
Here there was a break in the lines, as if the old fellow had droppedhis pen to dream a little while.
“For myself, I am very well, except for a cold I caught the other day atthe fair at Yvetot, where I had gone to hire a shepherd, having turnedaway mine because he was too dainty. How we are to be pitied with sucha lot of thieves! Besides, he was also rude. I heard from a pedlar, who,travelling through your part of the country this winter, had a toothdrawn, that Bovary was as usual working hard. That doesn’t surprise me;and he showed me his tooth; we had some coffee together. I asked him ifhe had seen you, and he said not, but that he had seen two horses in thestables, from which I conclude that business is looking up. So muchthe better, my dear children, and may God send you every imaginablehappiness! It grieves me not yet to have seen my dear littlegrand-daughter, Berthe Bovary. I have planted an Orleans plum-tree forher in the garden under your room, and I won’t have it touched unless itis to have jam made for her by and bye, that I will keep in the cupboardfor her when she comes.
“Good-bye, my dear children. I kiss you, my girl, you too, myson-in-law, and the little one on both cheeks. I am, with bestcompliments, your loving father.
“Theodore Rouault.”
She held the coarse paper in her fingers for some minutes. The spellingmistakes were interwoven one with the other, and Emma followed thekindly thought that cackled right through it like a hen half hiddenin the hedge of thorns. The writing had been dried with ashes fromthe hearth, for a little grey powder slipped from the letter on to herdress, and she almost thought she saw her father bending over the hearthto take up the tongs. How long since she had been with him, sitting onthe footstool in the chimney-corner, where she used to burn the end ofa bit of wood in the great flame of the sea-sedges! She remembered thesummer evenings all full of sunshine. The colts neighed when anyonepassed by, and galloped, galloped. Under her window there was a beehive,and sometimes the bees wheeling round in the light struck against herwindow like rebounding balls of gold. What happiness there had beenat that time, what freedom, what hope! What an abundance of illusions!Nothing was left of them now. She had got rid of them all in her soul’slife, in all her successive conditions of life, maidenhood, her marriage,and her love--thus constantly losing them all her life through, likea traveller who leaves something of his wealth at every inn along hisroad.
But what then, made her so unhappy? What was the extraordinarycatastrophe that had transformed her? And she raised her head, lookinground as if to seek the cause of that which made her suffer.
An April ray was dancing on the china of the whatnot; the fire burned;beneath her slippers she felt the softness of the carpet; the day wasbright, the air warm, and she heard her child shouting with laughter.
In fact, the little girl was just then rolling on the lawn in the midstof the grass that was being turned. She was lying flat on her stomachat the top of a rick. The servant was holding her by her skirt.Lestiboudois was raking by her side, and every time he came near shelent forward, beating the air with both her arms.
“Bring her to me,” said her mother, rushing to embrace her. “How I loveyou, my poor child! How I love you!”
Then noticing that the tips of her ears were rather dirty, she rang atonce for warm water, and washed her, changed her linen, her stockings,her shoes, asked a thousand questions about her health, as if on thereturn from a long journey, and finally, kissing her again and cryinga little, she gave her back to the servant, who stood quitethunderstricken at this excess of tenderness.
That evening Rodolphe found her more serious than usual.
“That will pass over,” he concluded; “it’s a whim:”
And he missed three rendezvous running. When he did come, she showedherself cold and almost contemptuous.
“Ah! you’re losing your time, my lady!”
And he pretended not to notice her melancholy sighs, nor thehandkerchief she took out.
Then Emma repented. She even asked herself why she detested Charles; ifit had not been better to have been able to love him? But he gave herno opportunities for such a revival of sentiment, so that she was muchembarrassed by her desire for sacrifice, when the druggist came just intime to provide her with an opportunity.
Chapter Eleven
He had recently read a eulogy on a new method for curing club-foot, andas he was a partisan of progress, he conceived the patriotic idea thatYonville, in order to keep to the fore, ought to have some operationsfor strephopody or club-foot.
“For,” said he to Emma, “what risk is there? See--” (and he enumeratedon his fingers the advantages of the attempt), “success, almost certainrelief and beautifying of the patient, celebrity acquired by theoperator. Why, for example, should not your husband relieve poorHippolyte of the ‘Lion d’Or’? Note that he would not fail to tell abouthis cure to all the travellers, and then” (Homais lowered his voice andlooked round him) “who is to prevent me from sending a short paragraphon the subject to the paper? Eh! goodness me! an article gets about; itis talked of; it ends by making a snowball! And who knows? who knows?”
In fact, Bovary might succeed. Nothing proved to Emma that he was notclever; and what a satisfaction for her to have urged him to a step bywhich his reputation and fortune would be increased! She only wished tolean on something more solid than love.
Charles, urged by the druggist and by her, allowed himself to bepersuaded. He sent to Rouen for Dr. Duval’s volume, and every evening,holding his head between both hands, plunged into the reading of it.
While he was studying equinus, varus, and valgus, that is to say,katastrephopody, endostrephopody, and exostrephopody (or better, thevarious turnings of the foot downwards, inwards, and outwards, with thehypostrephopody and anastrephopody), otherwise torsion downwards andupwards, Monsier Homais, with all sorts of arguments, was exhorting thelad at the inn to submit to the operation.
“You will scarcely feel, probably, a slight pain; it is a simple prick,like a little blood-letting, less than the extraction of certain corns.”
Hippolyte, reflecting, rolled his stupid eyes.
“However,” continued the chemist, “it doesn’t concern me. It’s for yoursake, for pure humanity! I should like to see you, my friend, rid ofyour hideous caudication, together with that waddling of the lumbarregions which, whatever you say, must considerably interfere with you inthe exercise of your calling.”
Then Homais represented to him how much jollier and brisker he wouldfeel afterwards, and even gave him to understand that he would be morelikely to please the women; and the stable-boy began to smile heavily.Then he attacked him through his vanity:
“Aren’t you a man? Hang it! what would you have done if you had had togo into the army, to go and fight beneath the standard? Ah! Hippolyte!”
And Homais retired, declaring that he could not understand thisobstinacy, this blindness in refusing the benefactions of science.
The poor fellow gave way, for it was like a conspiracy. Binet, who neverinterfered with other people’s business, Madame Lefrancois, Artémise,the neighbours, even the mayor, Monsieur Tuvache--everyone persuadedhim, lectured him, shamed him; but what finally decided him was that itwould cost him nothing. Bovary even undertook to provide the machinefor the operation. This generosity was an idea of Emma’s, and Charlesconsented to it, thinking in his heart of hearts that his wife was anangel.
So by the advice of the chemist, and after three fresh starts, he had akind of box made by the carpenter, with the aid of the locksmith,that weighed about eight pounds, and in which iron, wood, sheer-iron,leather, screws, and nuts had not been spared.
But to know which of Hippolyte’s tendons to cut, it was necessary firstof all to find out what kind of club-foot he had.
He had a foot forming almost a straight line with the leg, which,however, did not prevent it from being turned in, so that it was anequinus together with something of a varus, or else a slight varus witha strong tendency to equinus. But with this equinus, wide in foot likea horse’s hoof, with rugose skin, dry tendons, and large toes, on whichthe black nails looked as if made of iron, the clubfoot ran about likea deer from morn till night. He was constantly to be seen on the Place,jumping round the carts, thrusting his limping foot forwards. He seemedeven stronger on that leg than the other. By dint of hard service it hadacquired, as it were, moral qualities of patience and energy; andwhen he was given some heavy work, he stood on it in preference to itsfellow.
Now, as it was an equinus, it was necessary to cut the tendon ofAchilles, and, if need were, the anterior tibial muscle could be seen toafterwards for getting rid of the varus; for the doctor did not dare torisk both operations at once; he was even trembling already for fear ofinjuring some important region that he did not know.
Neither Ambrose Pare, applying for the first time since Celsus, after aninterval of fifteen centuries, a ligature to an artery, nor Dupuytren,about to open an abscess in the brain, nor Gensoul when he first tookaway the superior maxilla, had hearts that trembled, hands that shook,minds so strained as Monsieur Bovary when he approached Hippolyte, histenotome between his fingers. And as at hospitals, near by on a tablelay a heap of lint, with waxed thread, many bandages--a pyramid ofbandages--every bandage to be found at the druggist’s. It was MonsieurHomais who since morning had been organising all these preparations,as much to dazzle the multitude as to keep up his illusions. Charlespierced the skin; a dry crackling was heard. The tendon was cut, theoperation over. Hippolyte could not get over his surprise, but bent overBovary’s hands to cover them with kisses.
“Come, be calm,” said the druggist; “later on you will show yourgratitude to your benefactor.”
And he went down to tell the result to five or six inquirers who werewaiting in the yard, and who fancied that Hippolyte would reappearwalking properly. Then Charles, having buckled his patient into themachine, went home, where Emma, all anxiety, awaited him at the door.She threw herself on his neck; they sat down to table; he ate much,and at dessert he even wanted to take a cup of coffee, a luxury he onlypermitted himself on Sundays when there was company.
The evening was charming, full of prattle, of dreams together. Theytalked about their future fortune, of the improvements to be made intheir house; he saw people’s estimation of him growing, his comfortsincreasing, his wife always loving him; and she was happy to refreshherself with a new sentiment, healthier, better, to feel at last sometenderness for this poor fellow who adored her. The thought of Rodolphefor one moment passed through her mind, but her eyes turned again toCharles; she even noticed with surprise that he had not bad teeth.
They were in bed when Monsieur Homais, in spite of the servant, suddenlyentered the room, holding in his hand a sheet of paper just written. Itwas the paragraph he intended for the “Fanal de Rouen.” He brought itfor them to read.
“Read it yourself,” said Bovary.
He read--
“‘Despite the prejudices that still invest a part of the face of Europelike a net, the light nevertheless begins to penetrate our countryplaces. Thus on Tuesday our little town of Yonville found itself thescene of a surgical operation which is at the same time an act ofloftiest philanthropy. Monsieur Bovary, one of our most distinguishedpractitioners--’”
“Oh, that is too much! too much!” said Charles, choking with emotion.
“No, no! not at all! What next!”
“‘--Performed an operation on a club-footed man.’ I have not used thescientific term, because you know in a newspaper everyone would notperhaps understand. The masses must--’”
“No doubt,” said Bovary; “go on!”
“I proceed,” said the chemist. “‘Monsieur Bovary, one of our mostdistinguished practitioners, performed an operation on a club-footed mancalled Hippolyte Tautain, stableman for the last twenty-five years atthe hotel of the “Lion d’Or,” kept by Widow Lefrancois, at the Placed’Armes. The novelty of the attempt, and the interest incident to thesubject, had attracted such a concourse of persons that there wasa veritable obstruction on the threshold of the establishment. Theoperation, moreover, was performed as if by magic, and barely afew drops of blood appeared on the skin, as though to say that therebellious tendon had at last given way beneath the efforts of art. Thepatient, strangely enough--we affirm it as an eye-witness--complainedof no pain. His condition up to the present time leaves nothing to bedesired. Everything tends to show that his convelescence will be brief;and who knows even if at our next village festivity we shall not see ourgood Hippolyte figuring in the bacchic dance in the midst of a chorusof joyous boon-companions, and thus proving to all eyes by his verveand his capers his complete cure? Honour, then, to the generous savants!Honour to those indefatigable spirits who consecrate their vigils to theamelioration or to the alleviation of their kind! Honour, thrice honour!Is it not time to cry that the blind shall see, the deaf hear, the lamewalk? But that which fanaticism formerly promised to its elect, sciencenow accomplishes for all men. We shall keep our readers informed as tothe successive phases of this remarkable cure.’”
This did not prevent Mere Lefrancois, from coming five days after,scared, and crying out--
“Help! he is dying! I am going crazy!”
Charles rushed to the “Lion d’Or,” and the chemist, who caught sightof him passing along the Place hatless, abandoned his shop. He appearedhimself breathless, red, anxious, and asking everyone who was going upthe stairs--
“Why, what’s the matter with our interesting strephopode?”
The strephopode was writhing in hideous convulsions, so that the machinein which his leg was enclosed was knocked against the wall enough tobreak it.
With many precautions, in order not to disturb the position of the limb,the box was removed, and an awful sight presented itself. The outlinesof the foot disappeared in such a swelling that the entire skin seemedabout to burst, and it was covered with ecchymosis, caused by the famousmachine. Hippolyte had already complained of suffering from it. Noattention had been paid to him; they had to acknowledge that he had notbeen altogether wrong, and he was freed for a few hours. But, hardly hadthe oedema gone down to some extent, than the two savants thought fitto put back the limb in the apparatus, strapping it tighter to hastenmatters. At last, three days after, Hippolyte being unable to endure itany longer, they once more removed the machine, and were much surprisedat the result they saw. The livid tumefaction spread over the leg, withblisters here and there, whence there oozed a black liquid. Matterswere taking a serious turn. Hippolyte began to worry himself, and MereLefrancois, had him installed in the little room near the kitchen, sothat he might at least have some distraction.
But the tax-collector, who dined there every day, complained bitterly ofsuch companionship. Then Hippolyte was removed to the billiard-room.He lay there moaning under his heavy coverings, pale with long beard,sunken eyes, and from time to time turning his perspiring head on thedirty pillow, where the flies alighted. Madame Bovary went to see him.She brought him linen for his poultices; she comforted, and encouragedhim. Besides, he did not want for company, especially on market-days,when the peasants were knocking about the billiard-balls round him,fenced with the cues, smoked, drank, sang, and brawled.
“How are you?” they said, clapping him on the shoulder. “Ah! you’re notup to much, it seems, but it’s your own fault. You should do this! dothat!” And then they told him stories of people who had all been curedby other remedies than his. Then by way of consolation they added--
“You give way too much! Get up! You coddle yourself like a king! All thesame, old chap, you don’t smell nice!”
Gangrene, in fact, was spreading more and more. Bovary himself turnedsick at it. He came every hour, every moment. Hippolyte looked at himwith eyes full of terror, sobbing--
“When shall I get well? Oh, save me! How unfortunate I am! Howunfortunate I am!”
And the doctor left, always recommending him to diet himself.
“Don’t listen to him, my lad,” said Mere Lefrancois, “Haven’t theytortured you enough already? You’ll grow still weaker. Here! swallowthis.”
And she gave him some good beef-tea, a slice of mutton, a piece ofbacon, and sometimes small glasses of brandy, that he had not thestrength to put to his lips.
Abbe Bournisien, hearing that he was growing worse, asked to see him.He began by pitying his sufferings, declaring at the same time that heought to rejoice at them since it was the will of the Lord, and takeadvantage of the occasion to reconcile himself to Heaven.
“For,” said the ecclesiastic in a paternal tone, “you rather neglectedyour duties; you were rarely seen at divine worship. How many years isit since you approached the holy table? I understand that your work,that the whirl of the world may have kept you from care for yoursalvation. But now is the time to reflect. Yet don’t despair. I haveknown great sinners, who, about to appear before God (you are not yetat this point I know), had implored His mercy, and who certainly died inthe best frame of mind. Let us hope that, like them, you will set us agood example. Thus, as a precaution, what is to prevent you from sayingmorning and evening a ‘Hail Mary, full of grace,’ and ‘Our Father whichart in heaven’? Yes, do that, for my sake, to oblige me. That won’t costyou anything. Will you promise me?”
The poor devil promised. The cure came back day after day. He chattedwith the landlady; and even told anecdotes interspersed with jokes andpuns that Hippolyte did not understand. Then, as soon as he could, hefell back upon matters of religion, putting on an appropriate expressionof face.
His zeal seemed successful, for the club-foot soon manifested a desireto go on a pilgrimage to Bon-Secours if he were cured; to which MonsieurBournisien replied that he saw no objection; two precautions were betterthan one; it was no risk anyhow.
The druggist was indignant at what he called the manoeuvres of thepriest; they were prejudicial, he said, to Hippolyte’s convalescence,and he kept repeating to Madame Lefrancois, “Leave him alone! leave himalone! You perturb his morals with your mysticism.” But the good womanwould no longer listen to him; he was the cause of it all. From a spiritof contradiction she hung up near the bedside of the patient a basinfilled with holy-water and a branch of box.
Religion, however, seemed no more able to succour him than surgery, andthe invincible gangrene still spread from the extremities towardsthe stomach. It was all very well to vary the potions and change thepoultices; the muscles each day rotted more and more; and at lastCharles replied by an affirmative nod of the head when Mere Lefrancois,asked him if she could not, as a forlorn hope, send for Monsieur Canivetof Neufchâtel, who was a celebrity.
A doctor of medicine, fifty years of age, enjoying a good positionand self-possessed, Charles’s colleague did not refrain from laughingdisdainfully when he had uncovered the leg, mortified to the knee. Thenhaving flatly declared that it must be amputated, he went off to thechemist’s to rail at the asses who could have reduced a poor man to sucha state. Shaking Monsieur Homais by the button of his coat, he shoutedout in the shop--
“These are the inventions of Paris! These are the ideas of those gentryof the capital! It is like strabismus, chloroform, lithotrity, a heap ofmonstrosities that the Government ought to prohibit. But they want to dothe clever, and they cram you with remedies without, troubling aboutthe consequences. We are not so clever, not we! We are not savants,coxcombs, fops! We are practitioners; we cure people, and we shouldnot dream of operating on anyone who is in perfect health. Straightenclub-feet! As if one could straighten club-feet! It is as if one wished,for example, to make a hunchback straight!”
Homais suffered as he listened to this discourse, and he concealed hisdiscomfort beneath a courtier’s smile; for he needed to humour MonsierCanivet, whose prescriptions sometimes came as far as Yonville. So hedid not take up the defence of Bovary; he did not even make a singleremark, and, renouncing his principles, he sacrificed his dignity to themore serious interests of his business.
This amputation of the thigh by Doctor Canivet was a great event in thevillage. On that day all the inhabitants got up earlier, and the GrandeRue, although full of people, had something lugubrious about it, asif an execution had been expected. At the grocer’s they discussedHippolyte’s illness; the shops did no business, and Madame Tuvache, themayor’s wife, did not stir from her window, such was her impatience tosee the operator arrive.
He came in his gig, which he drove himself. But the springs of the rightside having at length given way beneath the weight of his corpulence, ithappened that the carriage as it rolled along leaned over a little, andon the other cushion near him could be seen a large box covered in redsheep-leather, whose three brass clasps shone grandly.
After he had entered like a whirlwind the porch of the “Lion d’Or,” thedoctor, shouting very loud, ordered them to unharness his horse. Then hewent into the stable to see that she was eating her oats all right; foron arriving at a patient’s he first of all looked after his mare and hisgig. People even said about this--
“Ah! Monsieur Canivet’s a character!”
And he was the more esteemed for this imperturbable coolness. Theuniverse to the last man might have died, and he would not have missedthe smallest of his habits.
Homais presented himself.
“I count on you,” said the doctor. “Are we ready? Come along!”
But the druggist, turning red, confessed that he was too sensitive toassist at such an operation.
“When one is a simple spectator,” he said, “the imagination, you know,is impressed. And then I have such a nervous system!”
“Pshaw!” interrupted Canivet; “on the contrary, you seem to me inclinedto apoplexy. Besides, that doesn’t astonish me, for you chemist fellowsare always poking about your kitchens, which must end by spoiling yourconstitutions. Now just look at me. I get up every day at four o’clock;I shave with cold water (and am never cold). I don’t wear flannels, andI never catch cold; my carcass is good enough! I live now in one way,now in another, like a philosopher, taking pot-luck; that is why Iam not squeamish like you, and it is as indifferent to me to carve aChristian as the first fowl that turns up. Then, perhaps, you will say,habit! habit!”
Then, without any consideration for Hippolyte, who was sweating withagony between his sheets, these gentlemen entered into a conversation,in which the druggist compared the coolness of a surgeon to that of ageneral; and this comparison was pleasing to Canivet, who launched outon the exigencies of his art. He looked upon, it as a sacred office,although the ordinary practitioners dishonoured it. At last, coming backto the patient, he examined the bandages brought by Homais, the samethat had appeared for the club-foot, and asked for someone to hold thelimb for him. Lestiboudois was sent for, and Monsieur Canivet havingturned up his sleeves, passed into the billiard-room, while the druggiststayed with Artémise and the landlady, both whiter than their aprons,and with ears strained towards the door.
Bovary during this time did not dare to stir from his house.
He kept downstairs in the sitting-room by the side of the firelesschimney, his chin on his breast, his hands clasped, his eyes staring.“What a mishap!” he thought, “what a mishap!” Perhaps, after all, he hadmade some slip. He thought it over, but could hit upon nothing. But themost famous surgeons also made mistakes; and that is what no one wouldever believe! People, on the contrary, would laugh, jeer! It wouldspread as far as Forges, as Neufchâtel, as Rouen, everywhere! Who couldsay if his colleagues would not write against him. Polemics would ensue;he would have to answer in the papers. Hippolyte might even prosecutehim. He saw himself dishonoured, ruined, lost; and his imagination,assailed by a world of hypotheses, tossed amongst them like an emptycask borne by the sea and floating upon the waves.
Emma, opposite, watched him; she did not share his humiliation; she feltanother--that of having supposed such a man was worth anything. As iftwenty times already she had not sufficiently perceived his mediocrity.
Charles was walking up and down the room; his boots creaked on thefloor.
“Sit down,” she said; “you fidget me.”
He sat down again.
How was it that she--she, who was so intelligent--could have allowedherself to be deceived again? and through what deplorable madness hadshe thus ruined her life by continual sacrifices? She recalled all herinstincts of luxury, all the privations of her soul, the sordidness ofmarriage, of the household, her dream sinking into the mire like woundedswallows; all that she had longed for, all that she had denied herself,all that she might have had! And for what? for what?
In the midst of the silence that hung over the village a heart-rendingcry rose on the air. Bovary turned white to fainting. She knit herbrows with a nervous gesture, then went on. And it was for him, for thiscreature, for this man, who understood nothing, who felt nothing! For hewas there quite quiet, not even suspecting that the ridicule of his namewould henceforth sully hers as well as his. She had made efforts to lovehim, and she had repented with tears for having yielded to another!
“But it was perhaps a valgus!” suddenly exclaimed Bovary, who wasmeditating.
At the unexpected shock of this phrase falling on her thought like aleaden bullet on a silver plate, Emma, shuddering, raised her head inorder to find out what he meant to say; and they looked at the other insilence, almost amazed to see each other, so far sundered were theyby their inner thoughts. Charles gazed at her with the dull look ofa drunken man, while he listened motionless to the last cries of thesufferer, that followed each other in long-drawn modulations, broken bysharp spasms like the far-off howling of some beast being slaughtered.Emma bit her wan lips, and rolling between her fingers a piece of coralthat she had broken, fixed on Charles the burning glance of her eyeslike two arrows of fire about to dart forth. Everything in him irritatedher now; his face, his dress, what he did not say, his whole person, hisexistence, in fine. She repented of her past virtue as of a crime, andwhat still remained of it rumbled away beneath the furious blows of herpride. She revelled in all the evil ironies of triumphant adultery.The memory of her lover came back to her with dazzling attractions; shethrew her whole soul into it, borne away towards this image with a freshenthusiasm; and Charles seemed to her as much removed from her life, asabsent forever, as impossible and annihilated, as if he had been aboutto die and were passing under her eyes.
There was a sound of steps on the pavement. Charles looked up, andthrough the lowered blinds he saw at the corner of the market inthe broad sunshine Dr. Canivet, who was wiping his brow with hishandkerchief. Homais, behind him, was carrying a large red box in hishand, and both were going towards the chemist’s.
Then with a feeling of sudden tenderness and discouragement Charlesturned to his wife saying to her--
“Oh, kiss me, my own!”
“Leave me!” she said, red with anger.
“What is the matter?” he asked, stupefied. “Be calm; compose yourself.You know well enough that I love you. Come!”
“Enough!” she cried with a terrible look.
And escaping from the room, Emma closed the door so violently that thebarometer fell from the wall and smashed on the floor.
Charles sank back into his arm-chair overwhelmed, trying to discoverwhat could be wrong with her, fancying some nervous illness, weeping,and vaguely feeling something fatal and incomprehensible whirling roundhim.
When Rodolphe came to the garden that evening, he found his mistresswaiting for him at the foot of the steps on the lowest stair. They threwtheir arms round one another, and all their rancour melted like snowbeneath the warmth of that kiss.
Chapter Twelve
They began to love one another again. Often, even in the middle of theday, Emma suddenly wrote to him, then from the window made a sign toJustin, who, taking his apron off, quickly ran to La Huchette. Rodolphewould come; she had sent for him to tell him that she was bored, thather husband was odious, her life frightful.
“But what can I do?” he cried one day impatiently.
“Ah! if you would--”
She was sitting on the floor between his knees, her hair loose, her looklost.
“Why, what?” said Rodolphe.
She sighed.
“We would go and live elsewhere--somewhere!”
“You are really mad!” he said laughing. “How could that be possible?”
She returned to the subject; he pretended not to understand, and turnedthe conversation.
What he did not understand was all this worry about so simple an affairas love. She had a motive, a reason, and, as it were, a pendant to heraffection.
Her tenderness, in fact, grew each day with her repulsion to herhusband. The more she gave up herself to the one, the more she loathedthe other. Never had Charles seemed to her so disagreeable, to havesuch stodgy fingers, such vulgar ways, to be so dull as when they foundthemselves together after her meeting with Rodolphe. Then, while playingthe spouse and virtue, she was burning at the thought of that head whoseblack hair fell in a curl over the sunburnt brow, of that form at onceso strong and elegant, of that man, in a word, who had such experiencein his reasoning, such passion in his desires. It was for him that shefiled her nails with the care of a chaser, and that there was neverenough cold-cream for her skin, nor of patchouli for her handkerchiefs.She loaded herself with bracelets, rings, and necklaces. When hewas coming she filled the two large blue glass vases with roses, andprepared her room and her person like a courtesan expecting a prince.The servant had to be constantly washing linen, and all day Félicitédid not stir from the kitchen, where little Justin, who often kept hercompany, watched her at work.
With his elbows on the long board on which she was ironing, hegreedily watched all these women’s clothes spread about him, the dimitypetticoats, the fichus, the collars, and the drawers with runningstrings, wide at the hips and growing narrower below.
“What is that for?” asked the young fellow, passing his hand over thecrinoline or the hooks and eyes.
“Why, haven’t you ever seen anything?” Félicité answered laughing. “Asif your mistress, Madame Homais, didn’t wear the same.”
“Oh, I daresay! Madame Homais!” And he added with a meditative air, “Asif she were a lady like madame!”
But Félicité grew impatient of seeing him hanging round her. She was sixyears older than he, and Theodore, Monsieur Guillaumin’s servant, wasbeginning to pay court to her.
“Let me alone,” she said, moving her pot of starch. “You’d better beoff and pound almonds; you are always dangling about women. Before youmeddle with such things, bad boy, wait till you’ve got a beard to yourchin.”
“Oh, don’t be cross! I’ll go and clean her boots.”
And he at once took down from the shelf Emma’s boots, all coated withmud, the mud of the rendezvous, that crumbled into powder beneath hisfingers, and that he watched as it gently rose in a ray of sunlight.
“How afraid you are of spoiling them!” said the servant, who wasn’t soparticular when she cleaned them herself, because as soon as the stuffof the boots was no longer fresh madame handed them over to her.
Emma had a number in her cupboard that she squandered one after theother, without Charles allowing himself the slightest observation. Soalso he disbursed three hundred francs for a wooden leg that she thoughtproper to make a present of to Hippolyte. Its top was covered with cork,and it had spring joints, a complicated mechanism, covered over by blacktrousers ending in a patent-leather boot. But Hippolyte, not daringto use such a handsome leg every day, begged Madame Bovary to get himanother more convenient one. The doctor, of course, had again to defraythe expense of this purchase.
So little by little the stable-man took up his work again. One saw himrunning about the village as before, and when Charles heard from afarthe sharp noise of the wooden leg, he at once went in another direction.
It was Monsieur Lheureux, the shopkeeper, who had undertaken the order;this provided him with an excuse for visiting Emma. He chatted with herabout the new goods from Paris, about a thousand feminine trifles, madehimself very obliging, and never asked for his money. Emma yielded tothis lazy mode of satisfying all her caprices. Thus she wanted to havea very handsome ridding-whip that was at an umbrella-maker’s at Rouento give to Rodolphe. The week after Monsieur Lheureux placed it on hertable.
But the next day he called on her with a bill for two hundred andseventy francs, not counting the centimes. Emma was much embarrassed;all the drawers of the writing-table were empty; they owed over afortnight’s wages to Lestiboudois, two quarters to the servant, for anyquantity of other things, and Bovary was impatiently expecting MonsieurDerozeray’s account, which he was in the habit of paying every yearabout Midsummer.
She succeeded at first in putting off Lheureux. At last he lostpatience; he was being sued; his capital was out, and unless he got somein he should be forced to take back all the goods she had received.
“Oh, very well, take them!” said Emma.
“I was only joking,” he replied; “the only thing I regret is the whip.My word! I’ll ask monsieur to return it to me.”
“No, no!” she said.
“Ah! I’ve got you!” thought Lheureux.
And, certain of his discovery, he went out repeating to himself in anundertone, and with his usual low whistle--
“Good! we shall see! we shall see!”
She was thinking how to get out of this when the servant coming input on the mantelpiece a small roll of blue paper “from MonsieurDerozeray’s.” Emma pounced upon and opened it. It contained fifteennapoleons; it was the account. She heard Charles on the stairs; threwthe gold to the back of her drawer, and took out the key.
Three days after Lheureux reappeared.
“I have an arrangement to suggest to you,” he said. “If, instead of thesum agreed on, you would take--”
“Here it is,” she said placing fourteen napoleons in his hand.
The tradesman was dumfounded. Then, to conceal his disappointment, hewas profuse in apologies and proffers of service, all of which Emmadeclined; then she remained a few moments fingering in the pocket ofher apron the two five-franc pieces that he had given her in change.She promised herself she would economise in order to pay back later on.“Pshaw!” she thought, “he won’t think about it again.”
Besides the riding-whip with its silver-gilt handle, Rodolphe hadreceived a seal with the motto _Amor nel cor;_[14] furthermore, a scarffor a muffler, and, finally, a cigar-case exactly like the Viscount’s,that Charles had formerly picked up in the road, and that Emma hadkept. These presents, however, humiliated him; he refused several; sheinsisted, and he ended by obeying, thinking her tyrannical andoverexacting.
[14] A loving heart.
Then she had strange ideas.
“When midnight strikes,” she said, “you must think of me.”
And if he confessed that he had not thought of her, there were floods ofreproaches that always ended with the eternal question--
“Do you love me?”
“Why, of course I love you,” he answered.
“A great deal?”
“Certainly!”
“You haven’t loved any others?”
“Did you think you’d got a virgin?” he exclaimed laughing.
Emma cried, and he tried to console her, adorning his protestations withpuns.
“Oh,” she went on, “I love you! I love you so that I could not livewithout you, do you see? There are times when I long to see you again,when I am torn by all the anger of love. I ask myself, Where ishe? Perhaps he is talking to other women. They smile upon him; heapproaches. Oh no; no one else pleases you. There are some morebeautiful, but I love you best. I know how to love best. I am yourservant, your concubine! You are my king, my idol! You are good, you arebeautiful, you are clever, you are strong!”
He had so often heard these things said that they did not strike him asoriginal. Emma was like all his mistresses; and the charm of novelty,gradually falling away like a garment, laid bare the eternal monotonyof passion, that has always the same forms and the same language. Hedid not distinguish, this man of so much experience, the difference ofsentiment beneath the sameness of expression. Because lips libertineand venal had murmured such words to him, he believed but little in thecandour of hers; exaggerated speeches hiding mediocre affections must bediscounted; as if the fullness of the soul did not sometimes overflow inthe emptiest metaphors, since no one can ever give the exact measure ofhis needs, nor of his conceptions, nor of his sorrows; and since humanspeech is like a cracked tin kettle, on which we hammer out tunes tomake bears dance when we long to move the stars.
But with that superior critical judgment that belongs to him who, in nomatter what circumstance, holds back, Rodolphe saw other delights to begot out of this love. He thought all modesty in the way. He treated herquite _sans façon_.[15] He made of her something supple and corrupt. Herswas an idiotic sort of attachment, full of admiration for him, ofvoluptuousness for her, a beatitude that benumbed her; her soul sankinto this drunkenness, shrivelled up, drowned in it, like Clarence inhis butt of Malmsey.
[15] Off-handedly.
By the mere effect of her love Madame Bovary’s manners changed.Her looks grew bolder, her speech more free; she even committed theimpropriety of walking out with Monsieur Rodolphe, a cigarette in hermouth, “as if to defy the people.” At last, those who still doubteddoubted no longer when one day they saw her getting out of the“Hirondelle,” her waist squeezed into a waistcoat like a man; and MadameBovary senior, who, after a fearful scene with her husband, had takenrefuge at her son’s, was not the least scandalised of the women-folk.Many other things displeased her. First, Charles had not attended toher advice about the forbidding of novels; then the “ways of the house” annoyed her; she allowed herself to make some remarks, and there werequarrels, especially one on account of Félicité.
Madame Bovary senior, the evening before, passing along the passage,had surprised her in company of a man--a man with a brown collar, aboutforty years old, who, at the sound of her step, had quickly escapedthrough the kitchen. Then Emma began to laugh, but the good lady grewangry, declaring that unless morals were to be laughed at one ought tolook after those of one’s servants.
“Where were you brought up?” asked the daughter-in-law, with soimpertinent a look that Madame Bovary asked her if she were not perhapsdefending her own case.
“Leave the room!” said the young woman, springing up with a bound.
“Emma! Mamma!” cried Charles, trying to reconcile them.
But both had fled in their exasperation. Emma was stamping her feet asshe repeated--
“Oh! what manners! What a peasant!”
He ran to his mother; she was beside herself. She stammered
“She is an insolent, giddy-headed thing, or perhaps worse!”
And she was for leaving at once if the other did not apologise. SoCharles went back again to his wife and implored her to give way; heknelt to her; she ended by saying--
“Very well! I’ll go to her.”
And in fact she held out her hand to her mother-in-law with the dignityof a marchioness as she said--
“Excuse me, madame.”
Then, having gone up again to her room, she threw herself flat on herbed and cried there like a child, her face buried in the pillow.
She and Rodolphe had agreed that in the event of anything extraordinaryoccurring, she should fasten a small piece of white paper to the blind,so that if by chance he happened to be in Yonville, he could hurry tothe lane behind the house. Emma made the signal; she had been waitingthree-quarters of an hour when she suddenly caught sight of Rodolphe atthe corner of the market. She felt tempted to open the window and callhim, but he had already disappeared. She fell back in despair.
Soon, however, it seemed to her that someone was walking on thepavement. It was he, no doubt. She went downstairs, crossed the yard. Hewas there outside. She threw herself into his arms.
“Do take care!” he said.
“Ah! if you knew!” she replied.
And she began telling him everything, hurriedly, disjointedly,exaggerating the facts, inventing many, and so prodigal of parenthesesthat he understood nothing of it.
“Come, my poor angel, courage! Be comforted! be patient!”
“But I have been patient; I have suffered for four years. A love likeours ought to show itself in the face of heaven. They torture me! I canbear it no longer! Save me!”
She clung to Rodolphe. Her eyes, full of tears, flashed like flamesbeneath a wave; her breast heaved; he had never loved her so much, sothat he lost his head and said “What is, it? What do you wish?”
“Take me away,” she cried, “carry me off! Oh, I pray you!”
And she threw herself upon his mouth, as if to seize there theunexpected consent if breathed forth in a kiss.
“But--” Rodolphe resumed.
“What?”
“Your little girl!”
She reflected a few moments, then replied--
“We will take her! It can’t be helped!”
“What a woman!” he said to himself, watching her as she went. For shehad run into the garden. Someone was calling her.
On the following days Madame Bovary senior was much surprised at thechange in her daughter-in-law. Emma, in fact, was showing herself moredocile, and even carried her deference so far as to ask for a recipe forpickling gherkins.
Was it the better to deceive them both? Or did she wish by a sort ofvoluptuous stoicism to feel the more profoundly the bitterness of thethings she was about to leave?
But she paid no heed to them; on the contrary, she lived as lost in theanticipated delight of her coming happiness.
It was an eternal subject for conversation with Rodolphe. She leant onhis shoulder murmuring--
“Ah! when we are in the mail-coach! Do you think about it? Can it be? Itseems to me that the moment I feel the carriage start, it will be as ifwe were rising in a balloon, as if we were setting out for the clouds.Do you know that I count the hours? And you?”
Never had Madame Bovary been so beautiful as at this period; she hadthat indefinable beauty that results from joy, from enthusiasm, fromsuccess, and that is only the harmony of temperament with circumstances.Her desires, her sorrows, the experience of pleasure, and her ever-youngillusions, that had, as soil and rain and winds and the sun make flowersgrow, gradually developed her, and she at length blossomed forth in allthe plenitude of her nature. Her eyelids seemed chiselled expressly forher long amorous looks in which the pupil disappeared, while a stronginspiration expanded her delicate nostrils and raised the fleshy cornerof her lips, shaded in the light by a little black down. One would havethought that an artist apt in conception had arranged the curls of hairupon her neck; they fell in a thick mass, negligently, and with thechanging chances of their adultery, that unbound them every day. Hervoice now took more mellow infections, her figure also; something subtleand penetrating escaped even from the folds of her gown and from theline of her foot. Charles, as when they were first married, thought herdelicious and quite irresistible.
When he came home in the middle of the night, he did not dare to wakeher. The porcelain night-light threw a round trembling gleam upon theceiling, and the drawn curtains of the little cot formed as it were awhite hut standing out in the shade, and by the bedside Charles lookedat them. He seemed to hear the light breathing of his child. She wouldgrow big now; every season would bring rapid progress. He already sawher coming from school as the day drew in, laughing, with ink-stains onher jacket, and carrying her basket on her arm. Then she would have tobe sent to the boarding-school; that would cost much; how was it tobe done? Then he reflected. He thought of hiring a small farm in theneighbourhood, that he would superintend every morning on his way to hispatients. He would save up what he brought in; he would put it in thesavings-bank. Then he would buy shares somewhere, no matter where;besides, his practice would increase; he counted upon that, for hewanted Berthe to be well-educated, to be accomplished, to learn to playthe piano. Ah! how pretty she would be later on when she was fifteen,when, resembling her mother, she would, like her, wear large straw hatsin the summer-time; from a distance they would be taken for two sisters.He pictured her to himself working in the evening by their side beneaththe light of the lamp; she would embroider him slippers; she would lookafter the house; she would fill all the home with her charm and hergaiety. At last, they would think of her marriage; they would find hersome good young fellow with a steady business; he would make her happy;this would last for ever.
Emma was not asleep; she pretended to be; and while he dozed off by herside she awakened to other dreams.
To the gallop of four horses she was carried away for a week towards anew land, whence they would return no more. They went on and on, theirarms entwined, without a word. Often from the top of a mountain theresuddenly glimpsed some splendid city with domes, and bridges, andships, forests of citron trees, and cathedrals of white marble, on whosepointed steeples were storks’ nests. They went at a walking-pace becauseof the great flag-stones, and on the ground there were bouquets offlowers, offered you by women dressed in red bodices. They heard thechiming of bells, the neighing of mules, together with the murmur ofguitars and the noise of fountains, whose rising spray refreshed heapsof fruit arranged like a pyramid at the foot of pale statues that smiledbeneath playing waters. And then, one night they came to a fishingvillage, where brown nets were drying in the wind along the cliffs andin front of the huts. It was there that they would stay; they would livein a low, flat-roofed house, shaded by a palm-tree, in the heart of agulf, by the sea. They would row in gondolas, swing in hammocks, andtheir existence would be easy and large as their silk gowns, warm andstar-spangled as the nights they would contemplate. However, in theimmensity of this future that she conjured up, nothing special stoodforth; the days, all magnificent, resembled each other like waves; andit swayed in the horizon, infinite, harmonised, azure, and bathed insunshine. But the child began to cough in her cot or Bovary snoredmore loudly, and Emma did not fall asleep till morning, when the dawnwhitened the windows, and when little Justin was already in the squaretaking down the shutters of the chemist’s shop.
She had sent for Monsieur Lheureux, and had said to him--
“I want a cloak--a large lined cloak with a deep collar.”
“You are going on a journey?” he asked.
“No; but--never mind. I may count on you, may I not, and quickly?”
He bowed.
“Besides, I shall want,” she went on, “a trunk--not too heavy--handy.”
“Yes, yes, I understand. About three feet by a foot and a half, as theyare being made just now.”
“And a travelling bag.”
“Decidedly,” thought Lheureux, “there’s a row on here.”
“And,” said Madame Bovary, taking her watch from her belt, “take this;you can pay yourself out of it.”
But the tradesman cried out that she was wrong; they knew one another;did he doubt her? What childishness!
She insisted, however, on his taking at least the chain, and Lheureuxhad already put it in his pocket and was going, when she called himback.
“You will leave everything at your place. As to the cloak”--she seemedto be reflecting--“do not bring it either; you can give me the maker’saddress, and tell him to have it ready for me.”
It was the next month that they were to run away. She was to leaveYonville as if she was going on some business to Rouen. Rodolphe wouldhave booked the seats, procured the passports, and even have written toParis in order to have the whole mail-coach reserved for them as far asMarseilles, where they would buy a carriage, and go on thence withoutstopping to Genoa. She would take care to send her luggage to Lheureuxwhence it would be taken direct to the “Hirondelle,” so that no onewould have any suspicion. And in all this there never was any allusionto the child. Rodolphe avoided speaking of her; perhaps he no longerthought about it.
He wished to have two more weeks before him to arrange some affairs;then at the end of a week he wanted two more; then he said he was ill;next he went on a journey. The month of August passed, and, after allthese delays, they decided that it was to be irrevocably fixed for the4th September--a Monday.
At length the Saturday before arrived.
Rodolphe came in the evening earlier than usual.
“Everything is ready?” she asked him.
“Yes.”
Then they walked round a garden-bed, and went to sit down near theterrace on the kerb-stone of the wall.
“You are sad,” said Emma.
“No; why?”
And yet he looked at her strangely in a tender fashion.
“It is because you are going away?” she went on; “because you areleaving what is dear to you--your life? Ah! I understand. I have nothingin the world! you are all to me; so shall I be to you. I will be yourpeople, your country; I will tend, I will love you!”
“How sweet you are!” he said, seizing her in his arms.
“Really!” she said with a voluptuous laugh. “Do you love me? Swear itthen!”
“Do I love you--love you? I adore you, my love.”
The moon, full and purple-coloured, was rising right out of the earthat the end of the meadow. She rose quickly between the branches of thepoplars, that hid her here and there like a black curtain pierced withholes. Then she appeared dazzling with whiteness in the empty heavensthat she lit up, and now sailing more slowly along, let fall upon theriver a great stain that broke up into an infinity of stars; and thesilver sheen seemed to writhe through the very depths like a heedlessserpent covered with luminous scales; it also resembled some monstercandelabra all along which sparkled drops of diamonds running together.The soft night was about them; masses of shadow filled the branches.Emma, her eyes half closed, breathed in with deep sighs the fresh windthat was blowing. They did not speak, lost as they were in the rush oftheir reverie. The tenderness of the old days came back to their hearts,full and silent as the flowing river, with the softness of the perfumeof the syringas, and threw across their memories shadows more immenseand more sombre than those of the still willows that lengthened out overthe grass. Often some night-animal, hedgehog or weasel, setting out onthe hunt, disturbed the lovers, or sometimes they heard a ripe peachfalling all alone from the espalier.
“Ah! what a lovely night!” said Rodolphe.
“We shall have others,” replied Emma; and, as if speaking to herself:“Yet, it will be good to travel. And yet, why should my heart beso heavy? Is it dread of the unknown? The effect of habits left? Orrather--? No; it is the excess of happiness. How weak I am, am I not?Forgive me!”
“There is still time!” he cried. “Reflect! perhaps you may repent!”
“Never!” she cried impetuously. And coming closer to him: “What illcould come to me? There is no desert, no precipice, no ocean I would nottraverse with you. The longer we live together the more it will be likean embrace, every day closer, more heart to heart. There will benothing to trouble us, no cares, no obstacle. We shall be alone, all toourselves eternally. Oh, speak! Answer me!”
At regular intervals he answered, “Yes--Yes--” She had passed her handsthrough his hair, and she repeated in a childlike voice, despite the bigtears which were falling, “Rodolphe! Rodolphe! Ah! Rodolphe! dear littleRodolphe!”
Midnight struck.
“Midnight!” said she. “Come, it is to-morrow. One day more!”
He rose to go; and as if the movement he made had been the signal fortheir flight, Emma said, suddenly assuming a gay air--
“You have the passports?”
“Yes.”
“You are forgetting nothing?”
“No.”
“Are you sure?”
“Certainly.”
“It is at the Hotel de Provence, is it not, that you will wait for me atmidday?”
He nodded.
“Till to-morrow then!” said Emma in a last caress; and she watched himgo.
He did not turn round. She ran after him, and, leaning over the water’sedge between the bulrushes--
“To-morrow!” she cried.
He was already on the other side of the river and walking fast acrossthe meadow.
After a few moments Rodolphe stopped; and when he saw her with her whitegown gradually fade away in the shade like a ghost, he was seized withsuch a beating of the heart that he leant against a tree lest he shouldfall.
“What an imbecile I am!” he said with a fearful oath. “No matter! Shewas a pretty mistress!”
And immediately Emma’s beauty, with all the pleasures of their love,came back to him. For a moment he softened; then he rebelled againsther.
“For, after all,” he exclaimed, gesticulating, “I can’t exilemyself--have a child on my hands.”
He was saying these things to give himself firmness.
“And besides, the worry, the expense! Ah! no, no, no, no! a thousandtimes no! That would be too stupid.”
Chapter Thirteen
No sooner was Rodolphe at home than he sat down quickly at his bureauunder the stag’s head that hung as a trophy on the wall. But when he hadthe pen between his fingers, he could think of nothing, so that, restingon his elbows, he began to reflect. Emma seemed to him to have recededinto a far-off past, as if the resolution he had taken had suddenlyplaced a distance between them.
To get back something of her, he fetched from the cupboard at thebedside an old Rheims biscuit-box, in which he usually kept his lettersfrom women, and from it came an odour of dry dust and witheredroses. First he saw a handkerchief with pale little spots. It was ahandkerchief of hers. Once when they were walking her nose had bled; hehad forgotten it. Near it, chipped at all the corners, was a miniaturegiven him by Emma: her toilette seemed to him pretentious, and herlanguishing look in the worst possible taste. Then, from looking at thisimage and recalling the memory of its original, Emma’s features littleby little grew confused in his remembrance, as if the living and thepainted face, rubbing one against the other, had effaced each other.Finally, he read some of her letters; they were full of explanationsrelating to their journey, short, technical, and urgent, like businessnotes. He wanted to see the long ones again, those of old times. Inorder to find them at the bottom of the box, Rodolphe disturbed all theothers, and mechanically began rummaging amidst this mass of papers andthings, finding pell-mell bouquets, garters, a black mask, pins, andhair--hair! dark and fair, some even, catching in the hinges of the box,broke when it was opened.
Thus dallying with his souvenirs, he examined the writing and the styleof the letters, as varied as their orthography. They were tender orjovial, facetious, melancholy; there were some that asked for love,others that asked for money. A word recalled faces to him, certaingestures, the sound of a voice; sometimes, however, he rememberednothing at all.
In fact, these women, rushing at once into his thoughts, cramped eachother and lessened, as reduced to a uniform level of love that equalisedthem all. So taking handfuls of the mixed-up letters, he amused himselffor some moments with letting them fall in cascades from his right intohis left hand. At last, bored and weary, Rodolphe took back the box tothe cupboard, saying to himself, “What a lot of rubbish!” Which summedup his opinion; for pleasures, like schoolboys in a school courtyard,had so trampled upon his heart that no green thing grew there, and thatwhich passed through it, more heedless than children, did not even, likethem, leave a name carved upon the wall.
“Come,” said he, “let’s begin.”
He wrote--
“Courage, Emma! courage! I would not bring misery into your life.”
“After all, that’s true,” thought Rodolphe. “I am acting in herinterest; I am honest.”
“Have you carefully weighed your resolution? Do you know to what anabyss I was dragging you, poor angel? No, you do not, do you? You werecoming confident and fearless, believing in happiness in the future. Ah!unhappy that we are--insensate!”
Rodolphe stopped here to think of some good excuse.
“If I told her all my fortune is lost? No! Besides, that would stopnothing. It would all have to be begun over again later on. As if onecould make women like that listen to reason!” He reflected, then wenton--
“I shall not forget you, oh believe it; and I shall ever have a profounddevotion for you; but some day, sooner or later, this ardour (such isthe fate of human things) would have grown less, no doubt. Lassitudewould have come to us, and who knows if I should not even have had theatrocious pain of witnessing your remorse, of sharing it myself, sinceI should have been its cause? The mere idea of the grief that would cometo you tortures me, Emma. Forget me! Why did I ever know you? Why wereyou so beautiful? Is it my fault? O my God! No, no! Accuse only fate.”
“That’s a word that always tells,” he said to himself.
“Ah, if you had been one of those frivolous women that one sees,certainly I might, through egotism, have tried an experiment, in thatcase without danger for you. But that delicious exaltation, at once yourcharm and your torment, has prevented you from understanding, adorablewoman that you are, the falseness of our future position. Nor had Ireflected upon this at first, and I rested in the shade of that idealhappiness as beneath that of the manchineel tree, without foreseeing theconsequences.”
“Perhaps she’ll think I’m giving it up from avarice. Ah, well! so muchthe worse; it must be stopped!”
“The world is cruel, Emma. Wherever we might have gone, it would havepersecuted us. You would have had to put up with indiscreet questions,calumny, contempt, insult perhaps. Insult to you! Oh! And I, who wouldplace you on a throne! I who bear with me your memory as a talisman! ForI am going to punish myself by exile for all the ill I have done you.I am going away. Whither I know not. I am mad. Adieu! Be good always.Preserve the memory of the unfortunate who has lost you. Teach my nameto your child; let her repeat it in her prayers.”
The wicks of the candles flickered. Rodolphe got up to, shut the window,and when he had sat down again--
“I think it’s all right. Ah! and this for fear she should come and huntme up.”
“I shall be far away when you read these sad lines, for I have wished toflee as quickly as possible to shun the temptation of seeing you again.No weakness! I shall return, and perhaps later on we shall talk togethervery coldly of our old love. Adieu!”
And there was a last “adieu” divided into two words! “A Dieu!” which hethought in very excellent taste.
“Now how am I to sign?” he said to himself. “‘Yours devotedly?’ No!‘Your friend?’ Yes, that’s it.”
“Your friend.”
He re-read his letter. He considered it very good.
“Poor little woman!” he thought with emotion. “She’ll think me harderthan a rock. There ought to have been some tears on this; but I can’tcry; it isn’t my fault.” Then, having emptied some water into a glass,Rodolphe dipped his finger into it, and let a big drop fall on thepaper, that made a pale stain on the ink. Then looking for a seal, hecame upon the one “Amor nel cor.”
“That doesn’t at all fit in with the circumstances. Pshaw! never mind!”
After which he smoked three pipes and went to bed.
The next day when he was up (at about two o’clock--he had slept late),Rodolphe had a basket of apricots picked. He put his letter atthe bottom under some vine leaves, and at once ordered Girard, hisploughman, to take it with care to Madame Bovary. He made use of thismeans for corresponding with her, sending according to the season fruitsor game.
“If she asks after me,” he said, “you will tell her that I have gone ona journey. You must give the basket to her herself, into her own hands.Get along and take care!”
Girard put on his new blouse, knotted his handkerchief round theapricots, and walking with great heavy steps in his thick iron-boundgaloshes, made his way to Yonville.
Madame Bovary, when he got to her house, was arranging a bundle of linenon the kitchen-table with Félicité.
“Here,” said the ploughboy, “is something for you--from the master.”
She was seized with apprehension, and as she sought in her pocket forsome coppers, she looked at the peasant with haggard eyes, while hehimself looked at her with amazement, not understanding how such apresent could so move anyone. At last he went out. Félicité remained.She could bear it no longer; she ran into the sitting room as if to takethe apricots there, overturned the basket, tore away the leaves, foundthe letter, opened it, and, as if some fearful fire were behind her,Emma flew to her room terrified.
Charles was there; she saw him; he spoke to her; she heard nothing, andshe went on quickly up the stairs, breathless, distraught, dumb, andever holding this horrible piece of paper, that crackled between herfingers like a plate of sheet-iron. On the second floor she stoppedbefore the attic door, which was closed.
Then she tried to calm herself; she recalled the letter; she must finishit; she did not dare to. And where? How? She would be seen! “Ah, no!here,” she thought, “I shall be all right.”
Emma pushed open the door and went in.
The slates threw straight down a heavy heat that gripped her temples,stifled her; she dragged herself to the closed garret-window. She drewback the bolt, and the dazzling light burst in with a leap.
Opposite, beyond the roofs, stretched the open country till it was lostto sight. Down below, underneath her, the village square was empty; thestones of the pavement glittered, the weathercocks on the houses weremotionless. At the corner of the street, from a lower storey, rose akind of humming with strident modulations. It was Binet turning.
She leant against the embrasure of the window, and reread the letterwith angry sneers. But the more she fixed her attention upon it, themore confused were her ideas. She saw him again, heard him, encircledhim with her arms, and throbs of her heart, that beat against her breastlike blows of a sledge-hammer, grew faster and faster, with unevenintervals. She looked about her with the wish that the earth mightcrumble into pieces. Why not end it all? What restrained her? She wasfree. She advanced, looking at the paving-stones, saying to herself,“Come! come!”
The luminous ray that came straight up from below drew the weight ofher body towards the abyss. It seemed to her that the ground of theoscillating square went up the walls and that the floor dipped onend like a tossing boat. She was right at the edge, almost hanging,surrounded by vast space. The blue of the heavens suffused her, the airwas whirling in her hollow head; she had but to yield, to let herselfbe taken; and the humming of the lathe never ceased, like an angry voicecalling her.
“Emma! Emma!” cried Charles.
She stopped.
“Wherever are you? Come!”
The thought that she had just escaped from death almost made her faintwith terror. She closed her eyes; then she shivered at the touch of ahand on her sleeve; it was Félicité.
“Master is waiting for you, madame; the soup is on the table.”
And she had to go down to sit at table.
She tried to eat. The food choked her. Then she unfolded her napkin asif to examine the darns, and she really thought of applying herself tothis work, counting the threads in the linen. Suddenly the remembranceof the letter returned to her. How had she lost it? Where could she findit? But she felt such weariness of spirit that she could not even inventa pretext for leaving the table. Then she became a coward; she wasafraid of Charles; he knew all, that was certain! Indeed he pronouncedthese words in a strange manner:
“We are not likely to see Monsieur Rodolphe soon again, it seems.”
“Who told you?” she said, shuddering.
“Who told me!” he replied, rather astonished at her abrupt tone. “Why,Girard, whom I met just now at the door of the Cafe Francais. He hasgone on a journey, or is to go.”
She gave a sob.
“What surprises you in that? He absents himself like that from timeto time for a change, and, ma foi, I think he’s right, when one has afortune and is a bachelor. Besides, he has jolly times, has our friend.He’s a bit of a rake. Monsieur Langlois told me--”
He stopped for propriety’s sake because the servant came in. She putback into the basket the apricots scattered on the sideboard. Charles,without noticing his wife’s colour, had them brought to him, took one,and bit into it.
“Ah! perfect!” said he; “just taste!”
And he handed her the basket, which she put away from her gently.
“Do just smell! What an odour!” he remarked, passing it under her noseseveral times.
“I am choking,” she cried, leaping up. But by an effort of will thespasm passed; then--
“It is nothing,” she said, “it is nothing! It is nervousness. Sit downand go on eating.” For she dreaded lest he should begin questioning her,attending to her, that she should not be left alone.
Charles, to obey her, sat down again, and he spat the stones of theapricots into his hands, afterwards putting them on his plate.
Suddenly a blue tilbury passed across the square at a rapid trot. Emmauttered a cry and fell back rigid to the ground.
In fact, Rodolphe, after many reflections, had decided to set out forRouen. Now, as from La Huchette to Buchy there is no other way than byYonville, he had to go through the village, and Emma had recognised himby the rays of the lanterns, which like lightning flashed through thetwilight.
The chemist, at the tumult which broke out in the house ran thither. Thetable with all the plates was upset; sauce, meat, knives, the salt, andcruet-stand were strewn over the room; Charles was calling for help;Berthe, scared, was crying; and Félicité, whose hands trembled, wasunlacing her mistress, whose whole body shivered convulsively.
“I’ll run to my laboratory for some aromatic vinegar,” said thedruggist.
Then as she opened her eyes on smelling the bottle--
“I was sure of it,” he remarked; “that would wake any dead person foryou!”
“Speak to us,” said Charles; “collect yourself; it is your Charles, wholoves you. Do you know me? See! here is your little girl! Oh, kiss her!”
The child stretched out her arms to her mother to cling to her neck. Butturning away her head, Emma said in a broken voice “No, no! no one!”
She fainted again. They carried her to her bed. She lay there stretchedat full length, her lips apart, her eyelids closed, her hands open,motionless, and white as a waxen image. Two streams of tears flowed fromher eyes and fell slowly upon the pillow.
Charles, standing up, was at the back of the alcove, and the chemist,near him, maintained that meditative silence that is becoming on theserious occasions of life.
“Do not be uneasy,” he said, touching his elbow; “I think the paroxysmis past.”
“Yes, she is resting a little now,” answered Charles, watching hersleep. “Poor girl! poor girl! She had gone off now!”
Then Homais asked how the accident had come about. Charles answered thatshe had been taken ill suddenly while she was eating some apricots.
“Extraordinary!” continued the chemist. “But it might be that theapricots had brought on the syncope. Some natures are so sensitive tocertain smells; and it would even be a very fine question to study bothin its pathological and physiological relation. The priests know theimportance of it, they who have introduced aromatics into all theirceremonies. It is to stupefy the senses and to bring on ecstasies--athing, moreover, very easy in persons of the weaker sex, who are moredelicate than the other. Some are cited who faint at the smell of burnthartshorn, of new bread--”
“Take care; you’ll wake her!” said Bovary in a low voice.
“And not only,” the druggist went on, “are human beings subject to suchanomalies, but animals also. Thus you are not ignorant of the singularlyaphrodisiac effect produced by the Nepeta cataria, vulgarly calledcatmint, on the feline race; and, on the other hand, to quote an examplewhose authenticity I can answer for. Bridaux (one of my old comrades, atpresent established in the Rue Malpalu) possesses a dog that falls intoconvulsions as soon as you hold out a snuff-box to him. He often evenmakes the experiment before his friends at his summer-house at GuillaumeWood. Would anyone believe that a simple sternutation could produce suchravages on a quadrupedal organism? It is extremely curious, is it not?”
“Yes,” said Charles, who was not listening to him.
“This shows us,” went on the other, smiling with benignself-sufficiency, “the innumerable irregularities of the nervous system.With regard to madame, she has always seemed to me, I confess, verysusceptible. And so I should by no means recommend to you, my dearfriend, any of those so-called remedies that, under the pretenceof attacking the symptoms, attack the constitution. No; no uselessphysicking! Diet, that is all; sedatives, emollients, dulcification.Then, don’t you think that perhaps her imagination should be workedupon?”
“In what way? How?” said Bovary.
“Ah! that is it. Such is indeed the question. ‘That is the question,’ asI lately read in a newspaper.”
But Emma, awaking, cried out--
“The letter! the letter!”
They thought she was delirious; and she was by midnight. Brain-fever hadset in.
For forty-three days Charles did not leave her. He gave up all hispatients; he no longer went to bed; he was constantly feeling her pulse,putting on sinapisms and cold-water compresses. He sent Justin as far asNeufchâtel for ice; the ice melted on the way; he sent him back again.He called Monsieur Canivet into consultation; he sent for Dr. Lariviere,his old master, from Rouen; he was in despair. What alarmed him most wasEmma’s prostration, for she did not speak, did not listen, did not evenseem to suffer, as if her body and soul were both resting together afterall their troubles.
About the middle of October she could sit up in bed supported bypillows. Charles wept when he saw her eat her first bread-and-jelly. Herstrength returned to her; she got up for a few hours of an afternoon,and one day, when she felt better, he tried to take her, leaning on hisarm, for a walk round the garden. The sand of the paths was disappearingbeneath the dead leaves; she walked slowly, dragging along her slippers,and leaning against Charles’s shoulder. She smiled all the time.
They went thus to the bottom of the garden near the terrace. She drewherself up slowly, shading her eyes with her hand to look. She lookedfar off, as far as she could, but on the horizon were only greatbonfires of grass smoking on the hills.
“You will tire yourself, my darling!” said Bovary. And, pushing hergently to make her go into the arbour, “Sit down on this seat; you’ll becomfortable.”
“Oh! no; not there!” she said in a faltering voice.
She was seized with giddiness, and from that evening her illnessrecommenced, with a more uncertain character, it is true, and morecomplex symptoms. Now she suffered in her heart, then in the chest, thehead, the limbs; she had vomitings, in which Charles thought he saw thefirst signs of cancer.
And besides this, the poor fellow was worried about money matters.
Chapter Fourteen
To begin with, he did not know how he could pay Monsieur Homais for allthe physic supplied by him, and though, as a medical man, he was notobliged to pay for it, he nevertheless blushed a little at such anobligation. Then the expenses of the household, now that the servant wasmistress, became terrible. Bills rained in upon the house; the tradesmengrumbled; Monsieur Lheureux especially harassed him. In fact, atthe height of Emma’s illness, the latter, taking advantage of thecircumstances to make his bill larger, had hurriedly brought the cloak,the travelling-bag, two trunks instead of one, and a number of otherthings. It was very well for Charles to say he did not want them. Thetradesman answered arrogantly that these articles had been ordered, andthat he would not take them back; besides, it would vex madame in herconvalescence; the doctor had better think it over; in short, he wasresolved to sue him rather than give up his rights and take back hisgoods. Charles subsequently ordered them to be sent back to the shop.Félicité forgot; he had other things to attend to; then thought no moreabout them. Monsieur Lheureux returned to the charge, and, by turnsthreatening and whining, so managed that Bovary ended by signing abill at six months. But hardly had he signed this bill than a bold ideaoccurred to him: it was to borrow a thousand francs from Lheureux.So, with an embarrassed air, he asked if it were possible to get them,adding that it would be for a year, at any interest he wished. Lheureuxran off to his shop, brought back the money, and dictated another bill,by which Bovary undertook to pay to his order on the 1st of Septembernext the sum of one thousand and seventy francs, which, with the hundredand eighty already agreed to, made just twelve hundred and fifty, thuslending at six per cent in addition to one-fourth for commission: andthe things bringing him in a good third at the least, this ought intwelve months to give him a profit of a hundred and thirty francs. Hehoped that the business would not stop there; that the bills would notbe paid; that they would be renewed; and that his poor little money,having thriven at the doctor’s as at a hospital, would come back to himone day considerably more plump, and fat enough to burst his bag.
Everything, moreover, succeeded with him. He was adjudicator for asupply of cider to the hospital at Neufchâtel; Monsieur Guillauminpromised him some shares in the turf-pits of Gaumesnil, and he dreamt ofestablishing a new diligence service between Arcueil and Rouen, whichno doubt would not be long in ruining the ramshackle van of the “Liond’Or,” and that, travelling faster, at a cheaper rate, and carrying moreluggage, would thus put into his hands the whole commerce of Yonville.
Charles several times asked himself by what means he should next year beable to pay back so much money. He reflected, imagined expedients, suchas applying to his father or selling something. But his father would bedeaf, and he--he had nothing to sell. Then he foresaw such worries thathe quickly dismissed so disagreeable a subject of meditation fromhis mind. He reproached himself with forgetting Emma, as if, all histhoughts belonging to this woman, it was robbing her of something not tobe constantly thinking of her.
The winter was severe, Madame Bovary’s convalescence slow. When itwas fine they wheeled her arm-chair to the window that overlooked thesquare, for she now had an antipathy to the garden, and the blinds onthat side were always down. She wished the horse to be sold; what sheformerly liked now displeased her. All her ideas seemed to be limited tothe care of herself. She stayed in bed taking little meals, rang for theservant to inquire about her gruel or to chat with her. The snow onthe market-roof threw a white, still light into the room; then the rainbegan to fall; and Emma waited daily with a mind full of eagerness forthe inevitable return of some trifling events which nevertheless had norelation to her. The most important was the arrival of the “Hirondelle” in the evening. Then the landlady shouted out, and other voicesanswered, while Hippolyte’s lantern, as he fetched the boxes from theboot, was like a star in the darkness. At mid-day Charles came in;then he went out again; next she took some beef-tea, and towards fiveo’clock, as the day drew in, the children coming back from school,dragging their wooden shoes along the pavement, knocked the clapper ofthe shutters with their rulers one after the other.
It was at this hour that Monsieur Bournisien came to see her. Heinquired after her health, gave her news, exhorted her to religion, in acoaxing little prattle that was not without its charm. The mere thoughtof his cassock comforted her.
One day, when at the height of her illness, she had thought herselfdying, and had asked for the communion; and, while they were making thepreparations in her room for the sacrament, while they were turning thenight table covered with syrups into an altar, and while Félicité wasstrewing dahlia flowers on the floor, Emma felt some power passingover her that freed her from her pains, from all perception, fromall feeling. Her body, relieved, no longer thought; another life wasbeginning; it seemed to her that her being, mounting toward God, wouldbe annihilated in that love like a burning incense that melts intovapour. The bed-clothes were sprinkled with holy water, the priest drewfrom the holy pyx the white wafer; and it was fainting with a celestialjoy that she put out her lips to accept the body of the Saviourpresented to her. The curtains of the alcove floated gently round herlike clouds, and the rays of the two tapers burning on the night-tableseemed to shine like dazzling halos. Then she let her head fall back,fancying she heard in space the music of seraphic harps, and perceivedin an azure sky, on a golden throne in the midst of saints holding greenpalms, God the Father, resplendent with majesty, who with a sign sent toearth angels with wings of fire to carry her away in their arms.
This splendid vision dwelt in her memory as the most beautiful thingthat it was possible to dream, so that now she strove to recall hersensation. That still lasted, however, but in a less exclusive fashionand with a deeper sweetness. Her soul, tortured by pride, at lengthfound rest in Christian humility, and, tasting the joy of weakness, shesaw within herself the destruction of her will, that must have left awide entrance for the inroads of heavenly grace. There existed, then,in the place of happiness, still greater joys--another love beyond allloves, without pause and without end, one that would grow eternally! Shesaw amid the illusions of her hope a state of purity floating above theearth mingling with heaven, to which she aspired. She wanted to becomea saint. She bought chaplets and wore amulets; she wished to have in herroom, by the side of her bed, a reliquary set in emeralds that she mightkiss it every evening.
The cure marvelled at this humour, although Emma’s religion, he thought,might, from its fervour, end by touching on heresy, extravagance. Butnot being much versed in these matters, as soon as they went beyond acertain limit he wrote to Monsieur Boulard, bookseller to Monsignor,to send him “something good for a lady who was very clever.” Thebookseller, with as much indifference as if he had been sending offhardware to niggers, packed up, pellmell, everything that was then thefashion in the pious book trade. There were little manuals in questionsand answers, pamphlets of aggressive tone after the manner of Monsieurde Maistre, and certain novels in rose-coloured bindings and witha honied style, manufactured by troubadour seminarists or penitentblue-stockings. There were the “Think of it; the Man of the World atMary’s Feet, by Monsieur de ***, decorated with many Orders”; “TheErrors of Voltaire, for the Use of the Young,” etc.
Madame Bovary’s mind was not yet sufficiently clear to apply herselfseriously to anything; moreover, she began this reading in too muchhurry. She grew provoked at the doctrines of religion; the arroganceof the polemic writings displeased her by their inveteracy in attackingpeople she did not know; and the secular stories, relieved withreligion, seemed to her written in such ignorance of the world, thatthey insensibly estranged her from the truths for whose proof she waslooking. Nevertheless, she persevered; and when the volume slippedfrom her hands, she fancied herself seized with the finest Catholicmelancholy that an ethereal soul could conceive.
As for the memory of Rodolphe, she had thrust it back to the bottom ofher heart, and it remained there more solemn and more motionless thana king’s mummy in a catacomb. An exhalation escaped from this embalmedlove, that, penetrating through everything, perfumed with tenderness theimmaculate atmosphere in which she longed to live. When she knelt on herGothic prie-Dieu, she addressed to the Lord the same suave words thatshe had murmured formerly to her lover in the outpourings of adultery.It was to make faith come; but no delights descended from the heavens,and she arose with tired limbs and with a vague feeling of a giganticdupery.
This searching after faith, she thought, was only one merit the more,and in the pride of her devoutness Emma compared herself to those grandladies of long ago whose glory she had dreamed of over a portrait of LaValliere, and who, trailing with so much majesty the lace-trimmed trainsof their long gowns, retired into solitudes to shed at the feet ofChrist all the tears of hearts that life had wounded.
Then she gave herself up to excessive charity. She sewed clothes for thepoor, she sent wood to women in childbed; and Charles one day, on cominghome, found three good-for-nothings in the kitchen seated at the tableeating soup. She had her little girl, whom during her illness herhusband had sent back to the nurse, brought home. She wanted to teachher to read; even when Berthe cried, she was not vexed. She had madeup her mind to resignation, to universal indulgence. Her language abouteverything was full of ideal expressions. She said to her child, “Isyour stomach-ache better, my angel?”
Madame Bovary senior found nothing to censure except perhaps this maniaof knitting jackets for orphans instead of mending her own house-linen;but, harassed with domestic quarrels, the good woman took pleasure inthis quiet house, and she even stayed there till after Easter, to escapethe sarcasms of old Bovary, who never failed on Good Friday to orderchitterlings.
Besides the companionship of her mother-in-law, who strengthened her alittle by the rectitude of her judgment and her grave ways, Emma almostevery day had other visitors. These were Madame Langlois, Madame Caron,Madame Dubreuil, Madame Tuvache, and regularly from two to five o’clockthe excellent Madame Homais, who, for her part, had never believed anyof the tittle-tattle about her neighbour. The little Homais also came tosee her; Justin accompanied them. He went up with them to her bedroom,and remained standing near the door, motionless and mute. Often evenMadame Bovary; taking no heed of him, began her toilette. She began bytaking out her comb, shaking her head with a quick movement, and whenhe for the first time saw all this mass of hair that fell to her kneesunrolling in black ringlets, it was to him, poor child! like a suddenentrance into something new and strange, whose splendour terrified him.
Emma, no doubt, did not notice his silent attentions or his timidity.She had no suspicion that the love vanished from her life was there,palpitating by her side, beneath that coarse holland shirt, in thatyouthful heart open to the emanations of her beauty. Besides, shenow enveloped all things with such indifference, she had words soaffectionate with looks so haughty, such contradictory ways, that onecould no longer distinguish egotism from charity, or corruption fromvirtue. One evening, for example, she was angry with the servant, whohad asked to go out, and stammered as she tried to find some pretext.Then suddenly--
“So you love him?” she said.
And without waiting for any answer from Félicité, who was blushing, sheadded, “There! run along; enjoy yourself!”
In the beginning of spring she had the garden turned up from end to end,despite Bovary’s remonstrances. However, he was glad to see her at lastmanifest a wish of any kind. As she grew stronger she displayed morewilfulness. First, she found occasion to expel Mere Rollet, the nurse,who during her convalescence had contracted the habit of coming toooften to the kitchen with her two nurslings and her boarder, betteroff for teeth than a cannibal. Then she got rid of the Homais family,successively dismissed all the other visitors, and even frequentedchurch less assiduously, to the great approval of the druggist, who saidto her in a friendly way--
“You were going in a bit for the cassock!”
As formerly, Monsieur Bournisien dropped in every day when he came outafter catechism class. He preferred staying out of doors to taking theair “in the grove,” as he called the arbour. This was the time whenCharles came home. They were hot; some sweet cider was brought out, andthey drank together to madame’s complete restoration.
Binet was there; that is to say, a little lower down against the terracewall, fishing for crayfish. Bovary invited him to have a drink, and hethoroughly understood the uncorking of the stone bottles.
“You must,” he said, throwing a satisfied glance all round him, even tothe very extremity of the landscape, “hold the bottle perpendicularly onthe table, and after the strings are cut, press up the cork withlittle thrusts, gently, gently, as indeed they do seltzer-water atrestaurants.”
But during his demonstration the cider often spurted right into theirfaces, and then the ecclesiastic, with a thick laugh, never missed thisjoke--
“Its goodness strikes the eye!”
He was, in fact, a good fellow and one day he was not even scandalisedat the chemist, who advised Charles to give madame some distractionby taking her to the theatre at Rouen to hear the illustrious tenor,Lagardy. Homais, surprised at this silence, wanted to know his opinion,and the priest declared that he considered music less dangerous formorals than literature.
But the chemist took up the defence of letters. The theatre, hecontended, served for railing at prejudices, and, beneath a mask ofpleasure, taught virtue.
“_Castigat ridendo mores_,[16] Monsieur Bournisien! Thus consider thegreater part of Voltaire’s tragedies; they are cleverly strewn withphilosophical reflections, that made them a vast school of morals anddiplomacy for the people.”
[16] It corrects customs through laughter.
“I,” said Binet, “once saw a piece called the ‘Gamin de Paris,’ in whichthere was the character of an old general that is really hit off to aT. He sets down a young swell who had seduced a working girl, who at theending--”
“Certainly,” continued Homais, “there is bad literature as there is badpharmacy, but to condemn in a lump the most important of the fine artsseems to me a stupidity, a Gothic idea, worthy of the abominable timesthat imprisoned Galileo.”
“I know very well,” objected the cure, “that there are good works,good authors. However, if it were only those persons of different sexesunited in a bewitching apartment, decorated rouge, those lights, thoseeffeminate voices, all this must, in the long-run, engender acertain mental libertinage, give rise to immodest thoughts and impuretemptations. Such, at any rate, is the opinion of all the Fathers.Finally,” he added, suddenly assuming a mystic tone of voice whilehe rolled a pinch of snuff between his fingers, “if the Church hascondemned the theatre, she must be right; we must submit to herdecrees.”
“Why,” asked the druggist, “should she excommunicate actors? Forformerly they openly took part in religious ceremonies. Yes, in themiddle of the chancel they acted; they performed a kind of farce called‘Mysteries,’ which often offended against the laws of decency.”
The ecclesiastic contented himself with uttering a groan, and thechemist went on--
“It’s like it is in the Bible; there there are, you know, more than onepiquant detail, matters really libidinous!”
And on a gesture of irritation from Monsieur Bournisien--
“Ah! you’ll admit that it is not a book to place in the hands of a younggirl, and I should be sorry if Athalie--”
“But it is the Protestants, and not we,” cried the other impatiently,“who recommend the Bible.”
“No matter,” said Homais. “I am surprised that in our days, in thiscentury of enlightenment, anyone should still persist in proscribing anintellectual relaxation that is inoffensive, moralising, and sometimeseven hygienic; is it not, doctor?”
“No doubt,” replied the doctor carelessly, either because, sharing thesame ideas, he wished to offend no one, or else because he had not anyideas.
The conversation seemed at an end when the chemist thought fit to shoota Parthian arrow.
“I’ve known priests who put on ordinary clothes to go and see dancerskicking about.”
“Come, come!” said the cure.
“Ah! I’ve known some!” And separating the words of his sentence, Homaisrepeated, “I--have--known--some!”
“Well, they were wrong,” said Bournisien, resigned to anything.
“By Jove! they go in for more than that,” exclaimed the druggist.
“Sir!” replied the ecclesiastic, with such angry eyes that the druggistwas intimidated by them.
“I only mean to say,” he replied in less brutal a tone, “that tolerationis the surest way to draw people to religion.”
“That is true! that is true!” agreed the good fellow, sitting down againon his chair. But he stayed only a few moments.
Then, as soon as he had gone, Monsieur Homais said to the doctor--
“That’s what I call a cock-fight. I beat him, did you see, in away!--Now take my advice. Take madame to the theatre, if it were onlyfor once in your life, to enrage one of these ravens, hang it! If anyonecould take my place, I would accompany you myself. Be quick about it.Lagardy is only going to give one performance; he’s engaged to go toEngland at a high salary. From what I hear, he’s a regular dog; he’srolling in money; he’s taking three mistresses and a cook along withhim. All these great artists burn the candle at both ends; they requirea dissolute life, that suits the imagination to some extent. But theydie at the hospital, because they haven’t the sense when young to layby. Well, a pleasant dinner! Goodbye till to-morrow.”
The idea of the theatre quickly germinated in Bovary’s head, for he atonce communicated it to his wife, who at first refused, alleging thefatigue, the worry, the expense; but, for a wonder, Charles did not givein, so sure was he that this recreation would be good for her. He sawnothing to prevent it: his mother had sent them three hundred francswhich he had no longer expected; the current debts were not very large,and the falling in of Lheureux’s bills was still so far off thatthere was no need to think about them. Besides, imagining that shewas refusing from delicacy, he insisted the more; so that by dint ofworrying her she at last made up her mind, and the next day at eighto’clock they set out in the “Hirondelle.”
The druggist, whom nothing whatever kept at Yonville, but who thoughthimself bound not to budge from it, sighed as he saw them go.
“Well, a pleasant journey!” he said to them; “happy mortals that youare!”
Then addressing himself to Emma, who was wearing a blue silk gown withfour flounces--
“You are as lovely as a Venus. You’ll cut a figure at Rouen.”
The diligence stopped at the “Croix-Rouge” in the Place Beauvoisine. Itwas the inn that is in every provincial faubourg, with large stablesand small bedrooms, where one sees in the middle of the court chickenspilfering the oats under the muddy gigs of the commercial travellers--agood old house, with worm-eaten balconies that creak in the wind onwinter nights, always full of people, noise, and feeding, whose blacktables are sticky with coffee and brandy, the thick windows made yellowby the flies, the damp napkins stained with cheap wine, and that alwayssmells of the village, like ploughboys dressed in Sundayclothes, hasa cafe on the street, and towards the countryside a kitchen-garden.Charles at once set out. He muddled up the stage-boxes with the gallery,the pit with the boxes; asked for explanations, did not understand them;was sent from the box-office to the acting-manager; came back to theinn, returned to the theatre, and thus several times traversed the wholelength of the town from the theatre to the boulevard.
Madame Bovary bought a bonnet, gloves, and a bouquet. The doctor wasmuch afraid of missing the beginning, and, without having had time toswallow a plate of soup, they presented themselves at the doors of thetheatre, which were still closed.
Chapter Fifteen
The crowd was waiting against the wall, symmetrically enclosed betweenthe balustrades. At the corner of the neighbouring streets huge billsrepeated in quaint letters “Lucie de Lammermoor-Lagardy-Opera-etc.” Theweather was fine, the people were hot, perspiration trickled amid thecurls, and handkerchiefs taken from pockets were mopping red foreheads;and now and then a warm wind that blew from the river gently stirred theborder of the tick awnings hanging from the doors of the public-houses.A little lower down, however, one was refreshed by a current of icy airthat smelt of tallow, leather, and oil. This was an exhalation fromthe Rue des Charrettes, full of large black warehouses where they madecasks.
For fear of seeming ridiculous, Emma before going in wished to have alittle stroll in the harbour, and Bovary prudently kept his tickets inhis hand, in the pocket of his trousers, which he pressed against hisstomach.
Her heart began to beat as soon as she reached the vestibule. Sheinvoluntarily smiled with vanity on seeing the crowd rushing to theright by the other corridor while she went up the staircase to thereserved seats. She was as pleased as a child to push with her fingerthe large tapestried door. She breathed in with all her might thedusty smell of the lobbies, and when she was seated in her box she bentforward with the air of a duchess.
The theatre was beginning to fill; opera-glasses were taken from theircases, and the subscribers, catching sight of one another, were bowing.They came to seek relaxation in the fine arts after the anxieties ofbusiness; but “business” was not forgotten; they still talked cottons,spirits of wine, or indigo. The heads of old men were to be seen,inexpressive and peaceful, with their hair and complexions looking likesilver medals tarnished by steam of lead. The young beaux were struttingabout in the pit, showing in the opening of their waistcoats their pinkor applegreen cravats, and Madame Bovary from above admired them leaningon their canes with golden knobs in the open palm of their yellowgloves.
Now the lights of the orchestra were lit, the lustre, let down from theceiling, throwing by the glimmering of its facets a sudden gaiety overthe theatre; then the musicians came in one after the other; andfirst there was the protracted hubbub of the basses grumbling, violinssqueaking, cornets trumpeting, flutes and flageolets fifing. But threeknocks were heard on the stage, a rolling of drums began, the brassinstruments played some chords, and the curtain rising, discovered acountry-scene.
It was the cross-roads of a wood, with a fountain shaded by an oak tothe left. Peasants and lords with plaids on their shoulders were singinga hunting-song together; then a captain suddenly came on, who evokedthe spirit of evil by lifting both his arms to heaven. Another appeared;they went away, and the hunters started afresh. She felt herselftransported to the reading of her youth, into the midst of Walter Scott.She seemed to hear through the mist the sound of the Scotch bagpipesre-echoing over the heather. Then her remembrance of the novel helpingher to understand the libretto, she followed the story phrase by phrase,while vague thoughts that came back to her dispersed at once again withthe bursts of music. She gave herself up to the lullaby of the melodies,and felt all her being vibrate as if the violin bows were drawn over hernerves. She had not eyes enough to look at the costumes, the scenery,the actors, the painted trees that shook when anyone walked, and thevelvet caps, cloaks, swords--all those imaginary things that floatedamid the harmony as in the atmosphere of another world. But a youngwoman stepped forward, throwing a purse to a squire in green. She wasleft alone, and the flute was heard like the murmur of a fountain or thewarbling of birds. Lucie attacked her cavatina in G major bravely. Sheplained of love; she longed for wings. Emma, too, fleeing from life,would have liked to fly away in an embrace. Suddenly Edgar-Lagardyappeared.
He had that splendid pallor that gives something of the majesty ofmarble to the ardent races of the South. His vigorous form was tightlyclad in a brown-coloured doublet; a small chiselled poniard hung againsthis left thigh, and he cast round laughing looks showing his whiteteeth. They said that a Polish princess having heard him sing one nighton the beach at Biarritz, where he mended boats, had fallen in lovewith him. She had ruined herself for him. He had deserted her forother women, and this sentimental celebrity did not fail to enhance hisartistic reputation. The diplomatic mummer took care always to slip intohis advertisements some poetic phrase on the fascination of hisperson and the susceptibility of his soul. A fine organ, imperturbablecoolness, more temperament than intelligence, more power of emphasisthan of real singing, made up the charm of this admirable charlatannature, in which there was something of the hairdresser and thetoreador.
From the first scene he evoked enthusiasm. He pressed Lucy in his arms,he left her, he came back, he seemed desperate; he had outbursts ofrage, then elegiac gurglings of infinite sweetness, and the notesescaped from his bare neck full of sobs and kisses. Emma leant forwardto see him, clutching the velvet of the box with her nails. She wasfilling her heart with these melodious lamentations that were drawnout to the accompaniment of the double-basses, like the cries of thedrowning in the tumult of a tempest. She recognised all the intoxicationand the anguish that had almost killed her. The voice of a prima donnaseemed to her to be but echoes of her conscience, and this illusion thatcharmed her as some very thing of her own life. But no one on earth hadloved her with such love. He had not wept like Edgar that last moonlitnight when they said, “To-morrow! to-morrow!” The theatre rang withcheers; they recommenced the entire movement; the lovers spoke ofthe flowers on their tomb, of vows, exile, fate, hopes; and when theyuttered the final adieu, Emma gave a sharp cry that mingled with thevibrations of the last chords.
“But why,” asked Bovary, “does that gentleman persecute her?”
“No, no!” she answered; “he is her lover!”
“Yet he vows vengeance on her family, while the other one who came onbefore said, ‘I love Lucie and she loves me!’ Besides, he went off withher father arm in arm. For he certainly is her father, isn’t he--theugly little man with a cock’s feather in his hat?”
Despite Emma’s explanations, as soon as the recitative duet beganin which Gilbert lays bare his abominable machinations to his masterAshton, Charles, seeing the false troth-ring that is to deceive Lucie,thought it was a love-gift sent by Edgar. He confessed, moreover, thathe did not understand the story because of the music, which interferedvery much with the words.
“What does it matter?” said Emma. “Do be quiet!”
“Yes, but you know,” he went on, leaning against her shoulder, “I liketo understand things.”
“Be quiet! be quiet!” she cried impatiently.
Lucie advanced, half supported by her women, a wreath of orange blossomsin her hair, and paler than the white satin of her gown. Emma dreamedof her marriage day; she saw herself at home again amid the corn in thelittle path as they walked to the church. Oh, why had not she, likethis woman, resisted, implored? She, on the contrary, had been joyous,without seeing the abyss into which she was throwing herself. Ah! ifin the freshness of her beauty, before the soiling of marriage and thedisillusions of adultery, she could have anchored her life upon somegreat, strong heart, then virtue, tenderness, voluptuousness, and dutyblending, she would never have fallen from so high a happiness. But thathappiness, no doubt, was a lie invented for the despair of all desire.She now knew the smallness of the passions that art exaggerated. So,striving to divert her thoughts, Emma determined now to see in thisreproduction of her sorrows only a plastic fantasy, well enough toplease the eye, and she even smiled internally with disdainful pity whenat the back of the stage under the velvet hangings a man appeared in ablack cloak.
His large Spanish hat fell at a gesture he made, and immediately theinstruments and the singers began the sextet. Edgar, flashing with fury,dominated all the others with his clearer voice; Ashton hurled homicidalprovocations at him in deep notes; Lucie uttered her shrill plaint,Arthur at one side, his modulated tones in the middle register, and thebass of the minister pealed forth like an organ, while the voices of thewomen repeating his words took them up in chorus delightfully. They wereall in a row gesticulating, and anger, vengeance, jealousy, terror, andstupefaction breathed forth at once from their half-opened mouths. Theoutraged lover brandished his naked sword; his guipure ruffle rose withjerks to the movements of his chest, and he walked from right to leftwith long strides, clanking against the boards the silver-gilt spurs ofhis soft boots, widening out at the ankles. He, she thought must have aninexhaustible love to lavish it upon the crowd with such effusion.All her small fault-findings faded before the poetry of the partthat absorbed her; and, drawn towards this man by the illusion of thecharacter, she tried to imagine to herself his life--that life resonant,extraordinary, splendid, and that might have been hers if fate hadwilled it. They would have known one another, loved one another. Withhim, through all the kingdoms of Europe she would have travelled fromcapital to capital, sharing his fatigues and his pride, picking up theflowers thrown to him, herself embroidering his costumes. Then eachevening, at the back of a box, behind the golden trellis-work she wouldhave drunk in eagerly the expansions of this soul that would have sungfor her alone; from the stage, even as he acted, he would have lookedat her. But the mad idea seized her that he was looking at her; it wascertain. She longed to run to his arms, to take refuge in his strength,as in the incarnation of love itself, and to say to him, to cry out,“Take me away! carry me with you! let us go! Thine, thine! all my ardourand all my dreams!”
The curtain fell.
The smell of the gas mingled with that of the breaths, the waving of thefans, made the air more suffocating. Emma wanted to go out; thecrowd filled the corridors, and she fell back in her arm-chair withpalpitations that choked her. Charles, fearing that she would faint, ranto the refreshment-room to get a glass of barley-water.
He had great difficulty in getting back to his seat, for his elbows werejerked at every step because of the glass he held in his hands, andhe even spilt three-fourths on the shoulders of a Rouen lady in shortsleeves, who feeling the cold liquid running down to her loins, utteredcries like a peacock, as if she were being assassinated. Her husband,who was a millowner, railed at the clumsy fellow, and while she was withher handkerchief wiping up the stains from her handsome cherry-colouredtaffeta gown, he angrily muttered about indemnity, costs, reimbursement.At last Charles reached his wife, saying to her, quite out of breath--
“Ma foi! I thought I should have had to stay there. There is such acrowd--SUCH a crowd!”
He added--
“Just guess whom I met up there! Monsieur Léon!”
“Léon?”
“Himself! He’s coming along to pay his respects.” And as he finishedthese words the ex-clerk of Yonville entered the box.
He held out his hand with the ease of a gentleman; and Madame Bovaryextended hers, without doubt obeying the attraction of a stronger will.She had not felt it since that spring evening when the rain fell uponthe green leaves, and they had said good-bye standing at the window.But soon recalling herself to the necessities of the situation, with aneffort she shook off the torpor of her memories, and began stammering afew hurried words.
“Ah, good-day! What! you here?”
“Silence!” cried a voice from the pit, for the third act was beginning.
“So you are at Rouen?”
“Yes.”
“And since when?”
“Turn them out! turn them out!” People were looking at them. They weresilent.
But from that moment she listened no more; and the chorus of the guests,the scene between Ashton and his servant, the grand duet in D major, allwere for her as far off as if the instruments had grown less sonorousand the characters more remote. She remembered the games at cards at thedruggist’s, and the walk to the nurse’s, the reading in the arbour,the _tête-à-tête_ by the fireside--all that poor love, so calm and soprotracted, so discreet, so tender, and that she had neverthelessforgotten. And why had he come back? What combination of circumstanceshad brought him back into her life? He was standing behind her, leaningwith his shoulder against the wall of the box; now and again she feltherself shuddering beneath the hot breath from his nostrils falling uponher hair.
“Does this amuse you?” said he, bending over her so closely that the endof his moustache brushed her cheek. She replied carelessly--
“Oh, dear me, no, not much.”
Then he proposed that they should leave the theatre and go and take anice somewhere.
“Oh, not yet; let us stay,” said Bovary. “Her hair’s undone; this isgoing to be tragic.”
But the mad scene did not at all interest Emma, and the acting of thesinger seemed to her exaggerated.
“She screams too loud,” said she, turning to Charles, who was listening.
“Yes--a little,” he replied, undecided between the frankness of hispleasure and his respect for his wife’s opinion.
Then with a sigh Léon said--
“The heat is--”
“Unbearable! Yes!”
“Do you feel unwell?” asked Bovary.
“Yes, I am stifling; let us go.”
Monsieur Léon put her long lace shawl carefully about her shoulders, andall three went off to sit down in the harbour, in the open air, outsidethe windows of a cafe.
First they spoke of her illness, although Emma interrupted Charlesfrom time to time, for fear, she said, of boring Monsieur Léon; and thelatter told them that he had come to spend two years at Rouen in a largeoffice, in order to get practice in his profession, which was differentin Normandy and Paris. Then he inquired after Berthe, the Homais, MereLefrancois, and as they had, in the husband’s presence, nothing more tosay to one another, the conversation soon came to an end.
People coming out of the theatre passed along the pavement, humming or shoutingat the top of their voices, “_O bel ange, ma Lucie!_”[17] Then Léon, playingthe dilettante, began to talk music. He had seen Tambourini, Rubini, Persiani,Grisi, and, compared with them, Lagardy, despite his grand outbursts, wasnowhere.
[17] Oh beautiful angel, my Lucie.
“Yet,” interrupted Charles, who was slowly sipping his rum-sherbet,“they say that he is quite admirable in the last act. I regret leavingbefore the end, because it was beginning to amuse me.”
“Why,” said the clerk, “he will soon give another performance.”
But Charles replied that they were going back next day. “Unless,” headded, turning to his wife, “you would like to stay alone, kitten?”
And changing his tactics at this unexpected opportunity that presenteditself to his hopes, the young man sang the praises of Lagardy in thelast number. It was really superb, sublime. Then Charles insisted--
“You would get back on Sunday. Come, make up your mind. You are wrong ifyou feel that this is doing you the least good.”
The tables round them, however, were emptying; a waiter came and stooddiscreetly near them. Charles, who understood, took out his purse; theclerk held back his arm, and did not forget to leave two more pieces ofsilver that he made chink on the marble.
“I am really sorry,” said Bovary, “about the money which you are--”
The other made a careless gesture full of cordiality, and taking his hatsaid--
“It is settled, isn’t it? To-morrow at six o’clock?”
Charles explained once more that he could not absent himself longer, butthat nothing prevented Emma--
“But,” she stammered, with a strange smile, “I am not sure--”
“Well, you must think it over. We’ll see. Night brings counsel.” Then toLéon, who was walking along with them, “Now that you are in our part ofthe world, I hope you’ll come and ask us for some dinner now and then.”
The clerk declared he would not fail to do so, being obliged, moreover,to go to Yonville on some business for his office. And they partedbefore the Saint-Herbland Passage just as the clock in the cathedralstruck half-past eleven.
Part III
Chapter One
Monsieur Léon, while studying law, had gone pretty often to thedancing-rooms, where he was even a great success amongst the grisettes,who thought he had a distinguished air. He was the best-mannered of thestudents; he wore his hair neither too long nor too short, didn’t spendall his quarter’s money on the first day of the month, and kept on goodterms with his professors. As for excesses, he had always abstained fromthem, as much from cowardice as from refinement.
Often when he stayed in his room to read, or else when sitting of anevening under the lime-trees of the Luxembourg, he let his Code fall tothe ground, and the memory of Emma came back to him. But gradually thisfeeling grew weaker, and other desires gathered over it, although itstill persisted through them all. For Léon did not lose all hope; therewas for him, as it were, a vague promise floating in the future, like agolden fruit suspended from some fantastic tree.
Then, seeing her again after three years of absence his passionreawakened. He must, he thought, at last make up his mind to possessher. Moreover, his timidity had worn off by contact with his gaycompanions, and he returned to the provinces despising everyone who hadnot with varnished shoes trodden the asphalt of the boulevards. Bythe side of a Parisienne in her laces, in the drawing-room of someillustrious physician, a person driving his carriage and wearing manyorders, the poor clerk would no doubt have trembled like a child; buthere, at Rouen, on the harbour, with the wife of this small doctorhe felt at his ease, sure beforehand he would shine. Self-possessiondepends on its environment. We don’t speak on the first floor as on thefourth; and the wealthy woman seems to have, about her, to guard hervirtue, all her banknotes, like a cuirass in the lining of her corset.
On leaving the Bovarys the night before, Léon had followed themthrough the streets at a distance; then having seen them stop at the“Croix-Rouge,” he turned on his heel, and spent the night meditating aplan.
So the next day about five o’clock he walked into the kitchen of theinn, with a choking sensation in his throat, pale cheeks, and thatresolution of cowards that stops at nothing.
“The gentleman isn’t in,” answered a servant.
This seemed to him a good omen. He went upstairs.
She was not disturbed at his approach; on the contrary, she apologisedfor having neglected to tell him where they were staying.
“Oh, I divined it!” said Léon.
He pretended he had been guided towards her by chance, by, instinct. Shebegan to smile; and at once, to repair his folly, Léon told her that hehad spent his morning in looking for her in all the hotels in the townone after the other.
“So you have made up your mind to stay?” he added.
“Yes,” she said, “and I am wrong. One ought not to accustom oneself toimpossible pleasures when there are a thousand demands upon one.”
“Oh, I can imagine!”
“Ah! no; for you, you are a man!”
But men too had had their trials, and the conversation went off intocertain philosophical reflections. Emma expatiated much on the misery ofearthly affections, and the eternal isolation in which the heart remainsentombed.
To show off, or from a naive imitation of this melancholy which calledforth his, the young man declared that he had been awfully bored duringthe whole course of his studies. The law irritated him, other vocationsattracted him, and his mother never ceased worrying him in every oneof her letters. As they talked they explained more and more fully themotives of their sadness, working themselves up in their progressiveconfidence. But they sometimes stopped short of the complete expositionof their thought, and then sought to invent a phrase that might expressit all the same. She did not confess her passion for another; he did notsay that he had forgotten her.
Perhaps he no longer remembered his suppers with girls after maskedballs; and no doubt she did not recollect the rendezvous of old when sheran across the fields in the morning to her lover’s house. The noisesof the town hardly reached them, and the room seemed small, as ifon purpose to hem in their solitude more closely. Emma, in a dimitydressing-gown, leant her head against the back of the old arm-chair; theyellow wall-paper formed, as it were, a golden background behind her,and her bare head was mirrored in the glass with the white parting inthe middle, and the tip of her ears peeping out from the folds of herhair.
“But pardon me!” she said. “It is wrong of me. I weary you with myeternal complaints.”
“No, never, never!”
“If you knew,” she went on, raising to the ceiling her beautiful eyes,in which a tear was trembling, “all that I had dreamed!”
“And I! Oh, I too have suffered! Often I went out; I went away. Idragged myself along the quays, seeking distraction amid the din of thecrowd without being able to banish the heaviness that weighed upon me.In an engraver’s shop on the boulevard there is an Italian print of oneof the Muses. She is draped in a tunic, and she is looking at themoon, with forget-me-nots in her flowing hair. Something drove me therecontinually; I stayed there hours together.” Then in a trembling voice,“She resembled you a little.”
Madame Bovary turned away her head that he might not see theirrepressible smile she felt rising to her lips.
“Often,” he went on, “I wrote you letters that I tore up.”
She did not answer. He continued--
“I sometimes fancied that some chance would bring you. I thought Irecognised you at street-corners, and I ran after all the carriagesthrough whose windows I saw a shawl fluttering, a veil like yours.”
She seemed resolved to let him go on speaking without interruption.Crossing her arms and bending down her face, she looked at the rosetteson her slippers, and at intervals made little movements inside the satinof them with her toes.
At last she sighed.
“But the most wretched thing, is it not--is to drag out, as I do, auseless existence. If our pains were only of some use to someone, weshould find consolation in the thought of the sacrifice.”
He started off in praise of virtue, duty, and silent immolation, havinghimself an incredible longing for self-sacrifice that he could notsatisfy.
“I should much like,” she said, “to be a nurse at a hospital.”
“Alas! men have none of these holy missions, and I see nowhere anycalling--unless perhaps that of a doctor.”
With a slight shrug of her shoulders, Emma interrupted him to speak ofher illness, which had almost killed her. What a pity! She should not besuffering now! Léon at once envied the calm of the tomb, and one eveninghe had even made his will, asking to be buried in that beautiful rugwith velvet stripes he had received from her. For this was how theywould have wished to be, each setting up an ideal to which they were nowadapting their past life. Besides, speech is a rolling-mill that alwaysthins out the sentiment.
But at this invention of the rug she asked, “But why?”
“Why?” He hesitated. “Because I loved you so!” And congratulatinghimself at having surmounted the difficulty, Léon watched her face outof the corner of his eyes.
It was like the sky when a gust of wind drives the clouds across. Themass of sad thoughts that darkened them seemed to be lifted from herblue eyes; her whole face shone. He waited. At last she replied--
“I always suspected it.”
Then they went over all the trifling events of that far-off existence,whose joys and sorrows they had just summed up in one word. Theyrecalled the arbour with clematis, the dresses she had worn, thefurniture of her room, the whole of her house.
“And our poor cactuses, where are they?”
“The cold killed them this winter.”
“Ah! how I have thought of them, do you know? I often saw them again asof yore, when on the summer mornings the sun beat down upon your blinds,and I saw your two bare arms passing out amongst the flowers.”
“Poor friend!” she said, holding out her hand to him.
Léon swiftly pressed his lips to it. Then, when he had taken a deepbreath--
“At that time you were to me I know not what incomprehensible force thattook captive my life. Once, for instance, I went to see you; but you, nodoubt, do not remember it.”
“I do,” she said; “go on.”
“You were downstairs in the ante-room, ready to go out, standing onthe last stair; you were wearing a bonnet with small blue flowers; andwithout any invitation from you, in spite of myself, I went with you.Every moment, however, I grew more and more conscious of my folly, andI went on walking by you, not daring to follow you completely, andunwilling to leave you. When you went into a shop, I waited in thestreet, and I watched you through the window taking off your gloves andcounting the change on the counter. Then you rang at Madame Tuvache’s;you were let in, and I stood like an idiot in front of the great heavydoor that had closed after you.”
Madame Bovary, as she listened to him, wondered that she was so old. Allthese things reappearing before her seemed to widen out her life; it waslike some sentimental immensity to which she returned; and from time totime she said in a low voice, her eyes half closed--
“Yes, it is true--true--true!”
They heard eight strike on the different clocks of the Beauvoisinequarter, which is full of schools, churches, and large empty hotels.They no longer spoke, but they felt as they looked upon each other abuzzing in their heads, as if something sonorous had escaped from thefixed eyes of each of them. They were hand in hand now, and the past,the future, reminiscences and dreams, all were confounded in thesweetness of this ecstasy. Night was darkening over the walls, on whichstill shone, half hidden in the shade, the coarse colours of four billsrepresenting four scenes from the “Tour de Nesle,” with a motto inSpanish and French at the bottom. Through the sash-window a patch ofdark sky was seen between the pointed roofs.
She rose to light two wax-candles on the drawers, then she sat downagain.
“Well!” said Léon.
“Well!” she replied.
He was thinking how to resume the interrupted conversation, when shesaid to him--
“How is it that no one until now has ever expressed such sentiments tome?”
The clerk said that ideal natures were difficult to understand. He fromthe first moment had loved her, and he despaired when he thought of thehappiness that would have been theirs, if thanks to fortune, meeting herearlier, they had been indissolubly bound to one another.
“I have sometimes thought of it,” she went on.
“What a dream!” murmured Léon. And fingering gently the blue binding ofher long white sash, he added, “And who prevents us from beginning now?”
“No, my friend,” she replied; “I am too old; you are too young. Forgetme! Others will love you; you will love them.”
“Not as you!” he cried.
“What a child you are! Come, let us be sensible. I wish it.”
She showed him the impossibility of their love, and that they mustremain, as formerly, on the simple terms of a fraternal friendship.
Was she speaking thus seriously? No doubt Emma did not herself know,quite absorbed as she was by the charm of the seduction, and thenecessity of defending herself from it; and contemplating the youngman with a moved look, she gently repulsed the timid caresses that histrembling hands attempted.
“Ah! forgive me!” he cried, drawing back.
Emma was seized with a vague fear at this shyness, more dangerous to herthan the boldness of Rodolphe when he advanced to her open-armed. No manhad ever seemed to her so beautiful. An exquisite candour emanated fromhis being. He lowered his long fine eyelashes, that curled upwards.His cheek, with the soft skin reddened, she thought, with desire of herperson, and Emma felt an invincible longing to press her lips to it.Then, leaning towards the clock as if to see the time--
“Ah! how late it is!” she said; “how we do chatter!”
He understood the hint and took up his hat.
“It has even made me forget the theatre. And poor Bovary has left mehere especially for that. Monsieur Lormeaux, of the Rue Grand-Pont, wasto take me and his wife.”
And the opportunity was lost, as she was to leave the next day.
“Really!” said Léon.
“Yes.”
“But I must see you again,” he went on. “I wanted to tell you--”
“What?”
“Something--important--serious. Oh, no! Besides, you will not go; it isimpossible. If you should--listen to me. Then you have not understoodme; you have not guessed--”
“Yet you speak plainly,” said Emma.
“Ah! you can jest. Enough! enough! Oh, for pity’s sake, let me see youonce--only once!”
“Well--” She stopped; then, as if thinking better of it, “Oh, not here!”
“Where you will.”
“Will you--” She seemed to reflect; then abruptly, “To-morrow at eleveno’clock in the cathedral.”
“I shall be there,” he cried, seizing her hands, which she disengaged.
And as they were both standing up, he behind her, and Emma with her headbent, he stooped over her and pressed long kisses on her neck.
“You are mad! Ah! you are mad!” she said, with sounding little laughs,while the kisses multiplied.
Then bending his head over her shoulder, he seemed to beg the consent ofher eyes. They fell upon him full of an icy dignity.
Léon stepped back to go out. He stopped on the threshold; then hewhispered with a trembling voice, “Tomorrow!”
She answered with a nod, and disappeared like a bird into the next room.
In the evening Emma wrote the clerk an interminable letter, in which shecancelled the rendezvous; all was over; they must not, for the sake oftheir happiness, meet again. But when the letter was finished, as shedid not know Léon’s address, she was puzzled.
“I’ll give it to him myself,” she said; “he will come.”
The next morning, at the open window, and humming on his balcony, Léonhimself varnished his pumps with several coatings. He put on whitetrousers, fine socks, a green coat, emptied all the scent he had intohis handkerchief, then having had his hair curled, he uncurled it again,in order to give it a more natural elegance.
“It is still too early,” he thought, looking at the hairdresser’scuckoo-clock, that pointed to the hour of nine. He read an old fashionjournal, went out, smoked a cigar, walked up three streets, thought itwas time, and went slowly towards the porch of Notre Dame.
It was a beautiful summer morning. Silver plate sparkled in thejeweller’s windows, and the light falling obliquely on the cathedralmade mirrors of the corners of the grey stones; a flock of birdsfluttered in the grey sky round the trefoil bell-turrets; the square,resounding with cries, was fragrant with the flowers that bordered itspavement, roses, jasmines, pinks, narcissi, and tube-roses, unevenlyspaced out between moist grasses, catmint, and chickweed for the birds;the fountains gurgled in the centre, and under large umbrellas, amidstmelons, piled up in heaps, flower-women, bare-headed, were twistingpaper round bunches of violets.
The young man took one. It was the first time that he had bought flowersfor a woman, and his breast, as he smelt them, swelled with pride, as ifthis homage that he meant for another had recoiled upon himself.
But he was afraid of being seen; he resolutely entered the church. Thebeadle, who was just then standing on the threshold in the middle of theleft doorway, under the “Dancing Marianne,” with feather cap, and rapierdangling against his calves, came in, more majestic than a cardinal, andas shining as a saint on a holy pyx.
He came towards Léon, and, with that smile of wheedling benignityassumed by ecclesiastics when they question children--
“The gentleman, no doubt, does not belong to these parts? The gentlemanwould like to see the curiosities of the church?”
“No!” said the other.
And he first went round the lower aisles. Then he went out to look atthe Place. Emma was not coming yet. He went up again to the choir.
The nave was reflected in the full fonts with the beginning of thearches and some portions of the glass windows. But the reflections ofthe paintings, broken by the marble rim, were continued farther on uponthe flag-stones, like a many-coloured carpet. The broad daylight fromwithout streamed into the church in three enormous rays from the threeopened portals. From time to time at the upper end a sacristan passed,making the oblique genuflexion of devout persons in a hurry. The crystallustres hung motionless. In the choir a silver lamp was burning, andfrom the side chapels and dark places of the church sometimes rosesounds like sighs, with the clang of a closing grating, its echoreverberating under the lofty vault.
Léon with solemn steps walked along by the walls. Life had never seemedso good to him. She would come directly, charming, agitated, lookingback at the glances that followed her, and with her flounced dress, hergold eyeglass, her thin shoes, with all sorts of elegant trifles that hehad never enjoyed, and with the ineffable seduction of yielding virtue.The church like a huge boudoir spread around her; the arches bent downto gather in the shade the confession of her love; the windows shoneresplendent to illumine her face, and the censers would burn that shemight appear like an angel amid the fumes of the sweet-smelling odours.
But she did not come. He sat down on a chair, and his eyes fell upon ablue stained window representing boatmen carrying baskets. He looked atit long, attentively, and he counted the scales of the fishes and thebutton-holes of the doublets, while his thoughts wandered off towardsEmma.
The beadle, standing aloof, was inwardly angry at this individual whotook the liberty of admiring the cathedral by himself. He seemed to himto be conducting himself in a monstrous fashion, to be robbing him in asort, and almost committing sacrilege.
But a rustle of silk on the flags, the tip of a bonnet, a linedcloak--it was she! Léon rose and ran to meet her.
Emma was pale. She walked fast.
“Read!” she said, holding out a paper to him. “Oh, no!”
And she abruptly withdrew her hand to enter the chapel of the Virgin,where, kneeling on a chair, she began to pray.
The young man was irritated at this bigot fancy; then he neverthelessexperienced a certain charm in seeing her, in the middle of arendezvous, thus lost in her devotions, like an Andalusian marchioness;then he grew bored, for she seemed never coming to an end.
Emma prayed, or rather strove to pray, hoping that some suddenresolution might descend to her from heaven; and to draw down divineaid she filled full her eyes with the splendours of the tabernacle. Shebreathed in the perfumes of the full-blown flowers in the large vases,and listened to the stillness of the church, that only heightened thetumult of her heart.
She rose, and they were about to leave, when the beadle came forward,hurriedly saying--
“Madame, no doubt, does not belong to these parts? Madame would like tosee the curiosities of the church?”
“Oh, no!” cried the clerk.
“Why not?” said she. For she clung with her expiring virtue to theVirgin, the sculptures, the tombs--anything.
Then, in order to proceed “by rule,” the beadle conducted them right tothe entrance near the square, where, pointing out with his cane a largecircle of block-stones without inscription or carving--
“This,” he said majestically, “is the circumference of the beautifulbell of Ambroise. It weighed forty thousand pounds. There was not itsequal in all Europe. The workman who cast it died of the joy--”
“Let us go on,” said Léon.
The old fellow started off again; then, having got back to the chapel ofthe Virgin, he stretched forth his arm with an all-embracing gestureof demonstration, and, prouder than a country squire showing you hisespaliers, went on--
“This simple stone covers Pierre de Breze, lord of Varenne and ofBrissac, grand marshal of Poitou, and governor of Normandy, who died atthe battle of Montlhery on the 16th of July, 1465.”
Léon bit his lips, fuming.
“And on the right, this gentleman all encased in iron, on theprancing horse, is his grandson, Louis de Breze, lord of Breval and ofMontchauvet, Count de Maulevrier, Baron de Mauny, chamberlain to theking, Knight of the Order, and also governor of Normandy; died on the23rd of July, 1531--a Sunday, as the inscription specifies; and below,this figure, about to descend into the tomb, portrays the same person.It is not possible, is it, to see a more perfect representation ofannihilation?”
Madame Bovary put up her eyeglasses. Léon, motionless, looked at her,no longer even attempting to speak a single word, to make a gesture,so discouraged was he at this two-fold obstinacy of gossip andindifference.
The everlasting guide went on--
“Near him, this kneeling woman who weeps is his spouse, Diane dePoitiers, Countess de Breze, Duchess de Valentinois, born in 1499, diedin 1566, and to the left, the one with the child is the Holy Virgin. Nowturn to this side; here are the tombs of the Ambroise. They were bothcardinals and archbishops of Rouen. That one was minister under LouisXII. He did a great deal for the cathedral. In his will he left thirtythousand gold crowns for the poor.”
And without stopping, still talking, he pushed them into a chapelfull of balustrades, some put away, and disclosed a kind of block thatcertainly might once have been an ill-made statue.
“Truly,” he said with a groan, “it adorned the tomb of Richard Coeur deLion, King of England and Duke of Normandy. It was the Calvinists, sir,who reduced it to this condition. They had buried it for spite in theearth, under the episcopal seat of Monsignor. See! this is the door bywhich Monsignor passes to his house. Let us pass on quickly to see thegargoyle windows.”
But Léon hastily took some silver from his pocket and seized Emma’sarm. The beadle stood dumfounded, not able to understand this untimelymunificence when there were still so many things for the stranger tosee. So calling him back, he cried--
“Sir! sir! The steeple! the steeple!”
“No, thank you!” said Léon.
“You are wrong, sir! It is four hundred and forty feet high, nine lessthan the great pyramid of Egypt. It is all cast; it--”
Léon was fleeing, for it seemed to him that his love, that for nearlytwo hours now had become petrified in the church like the stones, wouldvanish like a vapour through that sort of truncated funnel, of oblongcage, of open chimney that rises so grotesquely from the cathedral likethe extravagant attempt of some fantastic brazier.
“But where are we going?” she said.
Making no answer, he walked on with a rapid step; and Madame Bovarywas already, dipping her finger in the holy water when behind them theyheard a panting breath interrupted by the regular sound of a cane. Léonturned back.
“Sir!”
“What is it?”
And he recognised the beadle, holding under his arms and balancingagainst his stomach some twenty large sewn volumes. They were works“which treated of the cathedral.”
“Idiot!” growled Léon, rushing out of the church.
A lad was playing about the close.
“Go and get me a cab!”
The child bounded off like a ball by the Rue Quatre-Vents; then theywere alone a few minutes, face to face, and a little embarrassed.
“Ah! Léon! Really--I don’t know--if I ought,” she whispered. Then with amore serious air, “Do you know, it is very improper--”
“How so?” replied the clerk. “It is done at Paris.”
And that, as an irresistible argument, decided her.
Still the cab did not come. Léon was afraid she might go back into thechurch. At last the cab appeared.
“At all events, go out by the north porch,” cried the beadle, who wasleft alone on the threshold, “so as to see the Resurrection, the LastJudgment, Paradise, King David, and the Condemned in Hell-flames.”
“Where to, sir?” asked the coachman.
“Where you like,” said Léon, forcing Emma into the cab.
And the lumbering machine set out. It went down the Rue Grand-Pont,crossed the Place des Arts, the Quai Napoleon, the Pont Neuf, andstopped short before the statue of Pierre Corneille.
“Go on,” cried a voice that came from within.
The cab went on again, and as soon as it reached the CarrefourLafayette, set off down-hill, and entered the station at a gallop.
“No, straight on!” cried the same voice.
The cab came out by the gate, and soon having reached the Cours, trottedquietly beneath the elm-trees. The coachman wiped his brow, put hisleather hat between his knees, and drove his carriage beyond the sidealley by the meadow to the margin of the waters.
It went along by the river, along the towing-path paved with sharppebbles, and for a long while in the direction of Oyssel, beyond theisles.
But suddenly it turned with a dash across Quatremares, Sotteville, LaGrande-Chaussee, the Rue d’Elbeuf, and made its third halt in front ofthe Jardin des Plantes.
“Get on, will you?” cried the voice more furiously.
And at once resuming its course, it passed by Saint-Sever, by theQuai’des Curandiers, the Quai aux Meules, once more over the bridge, bythe Place du Champ de Mars, and behind the hospital gardens, where oldmen in black coats were walking in the sun along the terrace all greenwith ivy. It went up the Boulevard Bouvreuil, along the BoulevardCauchoise, then the whole of Mont-Riboudet to the Deville hills.
It came back; and then, without any fixed plan or direction, wanderedabout at hazard. The cab was seen at Saint-Pol, at Lescure, at MontGargan, at La Rougue-Marc and Place du Gaillardbois; in the RueMaladrerie, Rue Dinanderie, before Saint-Romain, Saint-Vivien,Saint-Maclou, Saint-Nicaise--in front of the Customs, at the “VieilleTour,” the “Trois Pipes,” and the Monumental Cemetery. From time to timethe coachman, on his box cast despairing eyes at the public-houses.He could not understand what furious desire for locomotion urged theseindividuals never to wish to stop. He tried to now and then, and atonce exclamations of anger burst forth behind him. Then he lashed hisperspiring jades afresh, but indifferent to their jolting, running upagainst things here and there, not caring if he did, demoralised, andalmost weeping with thirst, fatigue, and depression.
And on the harbour, in the midst of the drays and casks, and in thestreets, at the corners, the good folk opened large wonder-strickeneyes at this sight, so extraordinary in the provinces, a cab with blindsdrawn, and which appeared thus constantly shut more closely than a tomb,and tossing about like a vessel.
Once in the middle of the day, in the open country, just as the sunbeat most fiercely against the old plated lanterns, a bared hand passedbeneath the small blinds of yellow canvas, and threw out some scrapsof paper that scattered in the wind, and farther off lighted like whitebutterflies on a field of red clover all in bloom.
At about six o’clock the carriage stopped in a back street of theBeauvoisine Quarter, and a woman got out, who walked with her veil down,and without turning her head.
Chapter Two
On reaching the inn, Madame Bovary was surprised not to see thediligence. Hivert, who had waited for her fifty-three minutes, had atlast started.
Yet nothing forced her to go; but she had given her word that she wouldreturn that same evening. Moreover, Charles expected her, and in herheart she felt already that cowardly docility that is for some women atonce the chastisement and atonement of adultery.
She packed her box quickly, paid her bill, took a cab in the yard,hurrying on the driver, urging him on, every moment inquiring aboutthe time and the miles traversed. He succeeded in catching up the“Hirondelle” as it neared the first houses of Quincampoix.
Hardly was she seated in her corner than she closed her eyes, and openedthem at the foot of the hill, when from afar she recognised Félicité,who was on the lookout in front of the farrier’s shop. Hivert pulledin his horses and, the servant, climbing up to the window, saidmysteriously--
“Madame, you must go at once to Monsieur Homais. It’s for somethingimportant.”
The village was silent as usual. At the corner of the streets were smallpink heaps that smoked in the air, for this was the time for jam-making,and everyone at Yonville prepared his supply on the same day. But infront of the chemist’s shop one might admire a far larger heap, and thatsurpassed the others with the superiority that a laboratory must haveover ordinary stores, a general need over individual fancy.
She went in. The large arm-chair was upset, and even the “Fanal deRouen” lay on the ground, outspread between two pestles. She pushed openthe lobby door, and in the middle of the kitchen, amid brown jars fullof picked currants, of powdered sugar and lump sugar, of the scales onthe table, and of the pans on the fire, she saw all the Homais, smalland large, with aprons reaching to their chins, and with forks in theirhands. Justin was standing up with bowed head, and the chemist wasscreaming--
“Who told you to go and fetch it in the Capharnaum.”
“What is it? What is the matter?”
“What is it?” replied the druggist. “We are making preserves; they aresimmering; but they were about to boil over, because there is toomuch juice, and I ordered another pan. Then he, from indolence, fromlaziness, went and took, hanging on its nail in my laboratory, the keyof the Capharnaum.”
It was thus the druggist called a small room under the leads, full ofthe utensils and the goods of his trade. He often spent long hours therealone, labelling, decanting, and doing up again; and he looked uponit not as a simple store, but as a veritable sanctuary, whence thereafterwards issued, elaborated by his hands, all sorts of pills, boluses,infusions, lotions, and potions, that would bear far and wide hiscelebrity. No one in the world set foot there, and he respected it so,that he swept it himself. Finally, if the pharmacy, open to all comers,was the spot where he displayed his pride, the Capharnaum was the refugewhere, egoistically concentrating himself, Homais delighted in theexercise of his predilections, so that Justin’s thoughtlessness seemedto him a monstrous piece of irreverence, and, redder than the currants,he repeated--
“Yes, from the Capharnaum! The key that locks up the acids and causticalkalies! To go and get a spare pan! a pan with a lid! and that Ishall perhaps never use! Everything is of importance in the delicateoperations of our art! But, devil take it! one must make distinctions,and not employ for almost domestic purposes that which is meant forpharmaceutical! It is as if one were to carve a fowl with a scalpel; asif a magistrate--”
“Now be calm,” said Madame Homais.
And Athalie, pulling at his coat, cried “Papa! papa!”
“No, let me alone,” went on the druggist “let me alone, hang it! Myword! One might as well set up for a grocer. That’s it! go it! respectnothing! break, smash, let loose the leeches, burn the mallow-paste,pickle the gherkins in the window jars, tear up the bandages!”
“I thought you had--” said Emma.
“Presently! Do you know to what you exposed yourself? Didn’t you seeanything in the corner, on the left, on the third shelf? Speak, answer,articulate something.”
“I--don’t--know,” stammered the young fellow.
“Ah! you don’t know! Well, then, I do know! You saw a bottle of blueglass, sealed with yellow wax, that contains a white powder, on which Ihave even written ‘Dangerous!’ And do you know what is in it? Arsenic!And you go and touch it! You take a pan that was next to it!”
“Next to it!” cried Madame Homais, clasping her hands. “Arsenic! Youmight have poisoned us all.”
And the children began howling as if they already had frightful pains intheir entrails.
“Or poison a patient!” continued the druggist. “Do you want to see mein the prisoner’s dock with criminals, in a court of justice? To seeme dragged to the scaffold? Don’t you know what care I take in managingthings, although I am so thoroughly used to it? Often I am horrifiedmyself when I think of my responsibility; for the Government persecutesus, and the absurd legislation that rules us is a veritable Damocles’sword over our heads.”
Emma no longer dreamed of asking what they wanted her for, and thedruggist went on in breathless phrases--
“That is your return for all the kindness we have shown you! That ishow you recompense me for the really paternal care that I lavish onyou! For without me where would you be? What would you be doing? Whoprovides you with food, education, clothes, and all the means offiguring one day with honour in the ranks of society? But you must pullhard at the oar if you’re to do that, and get, as, people say,callosities upon your hands. _Fabricando fit faber, age quodagis_.”[18]
[18] The worker lives by working, do what he will.
He was so exasperated he quoted Latin. He would have quoted Chineseor Greenlandish had he known those two languages, for he was in oneof those crises in which the whole soul shows indistinctly what itcontains, like the ocean, which, in the storm, opens itself from theseaweeds on its shores down to the sands of its abysses.
And he went on--
“I am beginning to repent terribly of having taken you up! I shouldcertainly have done better to have left you to rot in your poverty andthe dirt in which you were born. Oh, you’ll never be fit for anythingbut to herd animals with horns! You have no aptitude for science! Youhardly know how to stick on a label! And there you are, dwelling with mesnug as a parson, living in clover, taking your ease!”
But Emma, turning to Madame Homais, “I was told to come here--”
“Oh, dear me!” interrupted the good woman, with a sad air, “how am I totell you? It is a misfortune!”
She could not finish, the druggist was thundering--“Empty it! Clean it!Take it back! Be quick!”
And seizing Justin by the collar of his blouse, he shook a book out ofhis pocket. The lad stooped, but Homais was the quicker, and, havingpicked up the volume, contemplated it with staring eyes and open mouth.
“CONJUGAL--LOVE!” he said, slowly separating the two words. “Ah! verygood! very good! very pretty! And illustrations! Oh, this is too much!”
Madame Homais came forward.
“No, do not touch it!”
The children wanted to look at the pictures.
“Leave the room,” he said imperiously; and they went out.
First he walked up and down with the open volume in his hand, rollinghis eyes, choking, tumid, apoplectic. Then he came straight to hispupil, and, planting himself in front of him with crossed arms--
“Have you every vice, then, little wretch? Take care! you are on adownward path. Did not you reflect that this infamous book might fallin the hands of my children, kindle a spark in their minds, tarnish thepurity of Athalie, corrupt Napoleon. He is already formed like a man.Are you quite sure, anyhow, that they have not read it? Can you certifyto me--”
“But really, sir,” said Emma, “you wished to tell me--”
“Ah, yes! madame. Your father-in-law is dead.”
In fact, Monsieur Bovary senior had expired the evening before suddenlyfrom an attack of apoplexy as he got up from table, and by way ofgreater precaution, on account of Emma’s sensibility, Charles had beggedHomais to break the horrible news to her gradually. Homais had thoughtover his speech; he had rounded, polished it, made it rhythmical; it wasa masterpiece of prudence and transitions, of subtle turns and delicacy;but anger had got the better of rhetoric.
Emma, giving up all chance of hearing any details, left the pharmacy;for Monsieur Homais had taken up the thread of his vituperations.However, he was growing calmer, and was now grumbling in a paternal tonewhilst he fanned himself with his skull-cap.
“It is not that I entirely disapprove of the work. Its author was adoctor! There are certain scientific points in it that it is not ill aman should know, and I would even venture to say that a man must know.But later--later! At any rate, not till you are man yourself and yourtemperament is formed.”
When Emma knocked at the door. Charles, who was waiting for her, cameforward with open arms and said to her with tears in his voice--
“Ah! my dear!”
And he bent over her gently to kiss her. But at the contact of his lipsthe memory of the other seized her, and she passed her hand over herface shuddering.
But she made answer, “Yes, I know, I know!”
He showed her the letter in which his mother told the event without anysentimental hypocrisy. She only regretted her husband had not receivedthe consolations of religion, as he had died at Daudeville, in thestreet, at the door of a cafe after a patriotic dinner with someex-officers.
Emma gave him back the letter; then at dinner, for appearance’s sake,she affected a certain repugnance. But as he urged her to try, sheresolutely began eating, while Charles opposite her sat motionless in adejected attitude.
Now and then he raised his head and gave her a long look full ofdistress. Once he sighed, “I should have liked to see him again!”
She was silent. At last, understanding that she must say something, “Howold was your father?” she asked.
“Fifty-eight.”
“Ah!”
And that was all.
A quarter of an hour after he added, “My poor mother! what will becomeof her now?”
She made a gesture that signified she did not know. Seeing her sotaciturn, Charles imagined her much affected, and forced himself to saynothing, not to reawaken this sorrow which moved him. And, shaking offhis own--
“Did you enjoy yourself yesterday?” he asked.
“Yes.”
When the cloth was removed, Bovary did not rise, nor did Emma; and asshe looked at him, the monotony of the spectacle drove little by littleall pity from her heart. He seemed to her paltry, weak, a cipher--ina word, a poor thing in every way. How to get rid of him? What aninterminable evening! Something stupefying like the fumes of opiumseized her.
They heard in the passage the sharp noise of a wooden leg on the boards.It was Hippolyte bringing back Emma’s luggage. In order to put it downhe described painfully a quarter of a circle with his stump.
“He doesn’t even remember any more about it,” she thought, looking atthe poor devil, whose coarse red hair was wet with perspiration.
Bovary was searching at the bottom of his purse for a centime, andwithout appearing to understand all there was of humiliation for himin the mere presence of this man, who stood there like a personifiedreproach to his incurable incapacity.
“Hallo! you’ve a pretty bouquet,” he said, noticing Léon’s violets onthe chimney.
“Yes,” she replied indifferently; “it’s a bouquet I bought just now froma beggar.”
Charles picked up the flowers, and freshening his eyes, red with tears,against them, smelt them delicately.
She took them quickly from his hand and put them in a glass of water.
The next day Madame Bovary senior arrived. She and her son wept much.Emma, on the pretext of giving orders, disappeared. The following daythey had a talk over the mourning. They went and sat down with theirworkboxes by the waterside under the arbour.
Charles was thinking of his father, and was surprised to feel so muchaffection for this man, whom till then he had thought he cared littleabout. Madame Bovary senior was thinking of her husband. The worstdays of the past seemed enviable to her. All was forgotten beneath theinstinctive regret of such a long habit, and from time to time whilstshe sewed, a big tear rolled along her nose and hung suspended there amoment. Emma was thinking that it was scarcely forty-eight hours sincethey had been together, far from the world, all in a frenzy of joy, andnot having eyes enough to gaze upon each other. She tried to recall theslightest details of that past day. But the presence of her husband andmother-in-law worried her. She would have liked to hear nothing, to seenothing, so as not to disturb the meditation on her love, that, do whatshe would, became lost in external sensations.
She was unpicking the lining of a dress, and the strips were scatteredaround her. Madame Bovary senior was plying her scissor without lookingup, and Charles, in his list slippers and his old brown surtout that heused as a dressing-gown, sat with both hands in his pockets, and did notspeak either; near them Berthe, in a little white pinafore, was rakingsand in the walks with her spade. Suddenly she saw Monsieur Lheureux,the linendraper, come in through the gate.
He came to offer his services “under the sad circumstances.” Emmaanswered that she thought she could do without. The shopkeeper was notto be beaten.
“I beg your pardon,” he said, “but I should like to have a private talkwith you.” Then in a low voice, “It’s about that affair--you know.”
Charles crimsoned to his ears. “Oh, yes! certainly.” And in hisconfusion, turning to his wife, “Couldn’t you, my darling?”
She seemed to understand him, for she rose; and Charles said to hismother, “It is nothing particular. No doubt, some household trifle.” Hedid not want her to know the story of the bill, fearing her reproaches.
As soon as they were alone, Monsieur Lheureux in sufficiently clearterms began to congratulate Emma on the inheritance, then to talk ofindifferent matters, of the espaliers, of the harvest, and of his ownhealth, which was always so-so, always having ups and downs. In fact, hehad to work devilish hard, although he didn’t make enough, in spite ofall people said, to find butter for his bread.
Emma let him talk on. She had bored herself so prodigiously the last twodays.
“And so you’re quite well again?” he went on. “Ma foi! I saw yourhusband in a sad state. He’s a good fellow, though we did have a littlemisunderstanding.”
She asked what misunderstanding, for Charles had said nothing of thedispute about the goods supplied to her.
“Why, you know well enough,” cried Lheureux. “It was about your littlefancies--the travelling trunks.”
He had drawn his hat over his eyes, and, with his hands behind hisback, smiling and whistling, he looked straight at her in an unbearablemanner. Did he suspect anything?
She was lost in all kinds of apprehensions. At last, however, he wenton--
“We made it up, all the same, and I’ve come again to propose anotherarrangement.”
This was to renew the bill Bovary had signed. The doctor, of course,would do as he pleased; he was not to trouble himself, especially justnow, when he would have a lot of worry. “And he would do better to giveit over to someone else--to you, for example. With a power of attorneyit could be easily managed, and then we (you and I) would have ourlittle business transactions together.”
She did not understand. He was silent. Then, passing to his trade,Lheureux declared that madame must require something. He would send hera black barege, twelve yards, just enough to make a gown.
“The one you’ve on is good enough for the house, but you want anotherfor calls. I saw that the very moment that I came in. I’ve the eye of anAmerican!”
He did not send the stuff; he brought it. Then he came again to measureit; he came again on other pretexts, always trying to make himselfagreeable, useful, “enfeoffing himself,” as Homais would have said, andalways dropping some hint to Emma about the power of attorney. He nevermentioned the bill; she did not think of it. Charles, at the beginningof her convalescence, had certainly said something about it to her,but so many emotions had passed through her head that she no longerremembered it. Besides, she took care not to talk of any moneyquestions. Madame Bovary seemed surprised at this, and attributed thechange in her ways to the religious sentiments she had contracted duringher illness.
But as soon as she was gone, Emma greatly astounded Bovary by herpractical good sense. It would be necessary to make inquiries, to lookinto mortgages, and see if there were any occasion for a sale by auctionor a liquidation. She quoted technical terms casually, pronounced thegrand words of order, the future, foresight, and constantly exaggeratedthe difficulties of settling his father’s affairs so much, that at lastone day she showed him the rough draft of a power of attorney to manageand administer his business, arrange all loans, sign and endorse allbills, pay all sums, etc. She had profited by Lheureux’s lessons.Charles naively asked her where this paper came from.
“Monsieur Guillaumin”; and with the utmost coolness she added, “I don’ttrust him overmuch. Notaries have such a bad reputation. Perhaps weought to consult--we only know--no one.”
“Unless Léon--” replied Charles, who was reflecting. But it wasdifficult to explain matters by letter. Then she offered to make thejourney, but he thanked her. She insisted. It was quite a contest ofmutual consideration. At last she cried with affected waywardness--
“No, I will go!”
“How good you are!” he said, kissing her forehead.
The next morning she set out in the “Hirondelle” to go to Rouen toconsult Monsieur Léon, and she stayed there three days.
Chapter Three
They were three full, exquisite days--a true honeymoon. They were atthe Hotel-de-Boulogne, on the harbour; and they lived there, with drawnblinds and closed doors, with flowers on the floor, and iced syrups werebrought them early in the morning.
Towards evening they took a covered boat and went to dine on one of theislands. It was the time when one hears by the side of the dockyard thecaulking-mallets sounding against the hull of vessels. The smoke ofthe tar rose up between the trees; there were large fatty drops on thewater, undulating in the purple colour of the sun, like floating plaquesof Florentine bronze.
They rowed down in the midst of moored boats, whose long oblique cablesgrazed lightly against the bottom of the boat. The din of the towngradually grew distant; the rolling of carriages, the tumult of voices,the yelping of dogs on the decks of vessels. She took off her bonnet,and they landed on their island.
They sat down in the low-ceilinged room of a tavern, at whose door hungblack nets. They ate fried smelts, cream and cherries. They lay downupon the grass; they kissed behind the poplars; and they would fain,like two Robinsons, have lived for ever in this little place, whichseemed to them in their beatitude the most magnificent on earth. It wasnot the first time that they had seen trees, a blue sky, meadows; thatthey had heard the water flowing and the wind blowing in the leaves;but, no doubt, they had never admired all this, as if Nature hadnot existed before, or had only begun to be beautiful since thegratification of their desires.
At night they returned. The boat glided along the shores of the islands.They sat at the bottom, both hidden by the shade, in silence. The squareoars rang in the iron thwarts, and, in the stillness, seemed to marktime, like the beating of a metronome, while at the stern the rudderthat trailed behind never ceased its gentle splash against the water.
Once the moon rose; they did not fail to make fine phrases, finding theorb melancholy and full of poetry. She even began to sing--
“One night, do you remember, we were sailing,” etc.
Her musical but weak voice died away along the waves, and the windscarried off the trills that Léon heard pass like the flapping of wingsabout him.
She was opposite him, leaning against the partition of the shallop,through one of whose raised blinds the moon streamed in. Her blackdress, whose drapery spread out like a fan, made her seem more slender,taller. Her head was raised, her hands clasped, her eyes turned towardsheaven. At times the shadow of the willows hid her completely; then shereappeared suddenly, like a vision in the moonlight.
Léon, on the floor by her side, found under his hand a ribbon of scarletsilk. The boatman looked at it, and at last said--
“Perhaps it belongs to the party I took out the other day. A lotof jolly folk, gentlemen and ladies, with cakes, champagne,cornets--everything in style! There was one especially, a tall handsomeman with small moustaches, who was that funny! And they all kept saying,‘Now tell us something, Adolphe--Dolpe,’ I think.”
She shivered.
“You are in pain?” asked Léon, coming closer to her.
“Oh, it’s nothing! No doubt, it is only the night air.”
“And who doesn’t want for women, either,” softly added the sailor,thinking he was paying the stranger a compliment.
Then, spitting on his hands, he took the oars again.
Yet they had to part. The adieux were sad. He was to send his letters toMere Rollet, and she gave him such precise instructions about a doubleenvelope that he admired greatly her amorous astuteness.
“So you can assure me it is all right?” she said with her last kiss.
“Yes, certainly.”
“But why,” he thought afterwards as he came back through the streetsalone, “is she so very anxious to get this power of attorney?”
Chapter Four
Léon soon put on an air of superiority before his comrades, avoidedtheir company, and completely neglected his work.
He waited for her letters; he re-read them; he wrote to her. He calledher to mind with all the strength of his desires and of his memories.Instead of lessening with absence, this longing to see her again grew,so that at last on Saturday morning he escaped from his office.
When, from the summit of the hill, he saw in the valley below thechurch-spire with its tin flag swinging in the wind, he felt thatdelight mingled with triumphant vanity and egoistic tenderness thatmillionaires must experience when they come back to their nativevillage.
He went rambling round her house. A light was burning in the kitchen. Hewatched for her shadow behind the curtains, but nothing appeared.
Mere Lefrancois, when she saw him, uttered many exclamations. Shethought he “had grown and was thinner,” while Artémise, on the contrary,thought him stouter and darker.
He dined in the little room as of yore, but alone, without thetax-gatherer; for Binet, tired of waiting for the “Hirondelle,” haddefinitely put forward his meal one hour, and now he dined punctually atfive, and yet he declared usually the rickety old concern “was late.”
Léon, however, made up his mind, and knocked at the doctor’s door.Madame was in her room, and did not come down for a quarter of an hour.The doctor seemed delighted to see him, but he never stirred out thatevening, nor all the next day.
He saw her alone in the evening, very late, behind the garden in thelane; in the lane, as she had the other one! It was a stormy night, andthey talked under an umbrella by lightning flashes.
Their separation was becoming intolerable. “I would rather die!” saidEmma. She was writhing in his arms, weeping. “Adieu! adieu! When shall Isee you again?”
They came back again to embrace once more, and it was then thatshe promised him to find soon, by no matter what means, a regularopportunity for seeing one another in freedom at least once a week. Emmanever doubted she should be able to do this. Besides, she was full ofhope. Some money was coming to her.
On the strength of it she bought a pair of yellow curtains with largestripes for her room, whose cheapness Monsieur Lheureux had commended;she dreamed of getting a carpet, and Lheureux, declaring that it wasn’t“drinking the sea,” politely undertook to supply her with one. She couldno longer do without his services. Twenty times a day she sent for him,and he at once put by his business without a murmur. People could notunderstand either why Mere Rollet breakfasted with her every day, andeven paid her private visits.
It was about this time, that is to say, the beginning of winter, thatshe seemed seized with great musical fervour.
One evening when Charles was listening to her, she began the same piecefour times over, each time with much vexation, while he, not noticingany difference, cried--
“Bravo! very goodl You are wrong to stop. Go on!”
“Oh, no; it is execrable! My fingers are quite rusty.”
The next day he begged her to play him something again.
“Very well; to please you!”
And Charles confessed she had gone off a little. She played wrong notesand blundered; then, stopping short--
“Ah! it is no use. I ought to take some lessons; but--” She bit her lipsand added, “Twenty francs a lesson, that’s too dear!”
“Yes, so it is--rather,” said Charles, giggling stupidly. “But it seemsto me that one might be able to do it for less; for there are artists ofno reputation, and who are often better than the celebrities.”
“Find them!” said Emma.
The next day when he came home he looked at her shyly, and at last couldno longer keep back the words.
“How obstinate you are sometimes! I went to Barfucheres to-day. Well,Madame Liegard assured me that her three young ladies who are atLa Misericorde have lessons at fifty sous apiece, and that from anexcellent mistress!”
She shrugged her shoulders and did not open her piano again. But whenshe passed by it (if Bovary were there), she sighed--
“Ah! my poor piano!”
And when anyone came to see her, she did not fail to inform them shehad given up music, and could not begin again now for important reasons.Then people commiserated her--
“What a pity! she had so much talent!”
They even spoke to Bovary about it. They put him to shame, andespecially the chemist.
“You are wrong. One should never let any of the faculties of nature liefallow. Besides, just think, my good friend, that by inducing madame tostudy; you are economising on the subsequent musical education ofyour child. For my own part, I think that mothers ought themselves toinstruct their children. That is an idea of Rousseau’s, still rathernew perhaps, but that will end by triumphing, I am certain of it, likemothers nursing their own children and vaccination.”
So Charles returned once more to this question of the piano. Emmareplied bitterly that it would be better to sell it. This poor piano,that had given her vanity so much satisfaction--to see it go was toBovary like the indefinable suicide of a part of herself.
“If you liked,” he said, “a lesson from time to time, that wouldn’tafter all be very ruinous.”
“But lessons,” she replied, “are only of use when followed up.”
And thus it was she set about obtaining her husband’s permission to goto town once a week to see her lover. At the end of a month she was evenconsidered to have made considerable progress.
Chapter Five
She went on Thursdays. She got up and dressed silently, in order not toawaken Charles, who would have made remarks about her getting ready tooearly. Next she walked up and down, went to the windows, and looked outat the Place. The early dawn was broadening between the pillars of themarket, and the chemist’s shop, with the shutters still up, showed inthe pale light of the dawn the large letters of his signboard.
When the clock pointed to a quarter past seven, she went off to the“Lion d’Or,” whose door Artémise opened yawning. The girl then madeup the coals covered by the cinders, and Emma remained alone in thekitchen. Now and again she went out. Hivert was leisurely harnessing hishorses, listening, moreover, to Mere Lefrancois, who, passing her headand nightcap through a grating, was charging him with commissions andgiving him explanations that would have confused anyone else. Emma keptbeating the soles of her boots against the pavement of the yard.
At last, when he had eaten his soup, put on his cloak, lighted his pipe,and grasped his whip, he calmly installed himself on his seat.
The “Hirondelle” started at a slow trot, and for about a mile stoppedhere and there to pick up passengers who waited for it, standing at theborder of the road, in front of their yard gates.
Those who had secured seats the evening before kept it waiting; someeven were still in bed in their houses. Hivert called, shouted, swore;then he got down from his seat and went and knocked loudly at the doors.The wind blew through the cracked windows.
The four seats, however, filled up. The carriage rolled off; rows ofapple-trees followed one upon another, and the road between its two longditches, full of yellow water, rose, constantly narrowing towards thehorizon.
Emma knew it from end to end; she knew that after a meadow there wasa sign-post, next an elm, a barn, or the hut of a lime-kiln tender.Sometimes even, in the hope of getting some surprise, she shut her eyes,but she never lost the clear perception of the distance to be traversed.
At last the brick houses began to follow one another more closely, theearth resounded beneath the wheels, the “Hirondelle” glided between thegardens, where through an opening one saw statues, a periwinkle plant,clipped yews, and a swing. Then on a sudden the town appeared. Slopingdown like an amphitheatre, and drowned in the fog, it widened outbeyond the bridges confusedly. Then the open country spread away witha monotonous movement till it touched in the distance the vague line ofthe pale sky. Seen thus from above, the whole landscape looked immovableas a picture; the anchored ships were massed in one corner, the rivercurved round the foot of the green hills, and the isles, oblique inshape, lay on the water, like large, motionless, black fishes. Thefactory chimneys belched forth immense brown fumes that were blown awayat the top. One heard the rumbling of the foundries, together with theclear chimes of the churches that stood out in the mist. The leaflesstrees on the boulevards made violet thickets in the midst of thehouses, and the roofs, all shining with the rain, threw back unequalreflections, according to the height of the quarters in which they were.Sometimes a gust of wind drove the clouds towards the Saint Catherinehills, like aerial waves that broke silently against a cliff.
A giddiness seemed to her to detach itself from this mass of existence,and her heart swelled as if the hundred and twenty thousand souls thatpalpitated there had all at once sent into it the vapour of the passionsshe fancied theirs. Her love grew in the presence of this vastness, andexpanded with tumult to the vague murmurings that rose towards her. Shepoured it out upon the square, on the walks, on the streets, and theold Norman city outspread before her eyes as an enormous capital, as aBabylon into which she was entering. She leant with both hands againstthe window, drinking in the breeze; the three horses galloped, thestones grated in the mud, the diligence rocked, and Hivert, from afar,hailed the carts on the road, while the bourgeois who had spent thenight at the Guillaume woods came quietly down the hill in their littlefamily carriages.
They stopped at the barrier; Emma undid her overshoes, put on othergloves, rearranged her shawl, and some twenty paces farther she got downfrom the “Hirondelle.”
The town was then awakening. Shop-boys in caps were cleaning up theshop-fronts, and women with baskets against their hips, at intervalsuttered sonorous cries at the corners of streets. She walked withdowncast eyes, close to the walls, and smiling with pleasure under herlowered black veil.
For fear of being seen, she did not usually take the most direct road.She plunged into dark alleys, and, all perspiring, reached the bottomof the Rue Nationale, near the fountain that stands there. It is thequarter for theatres, public-houses, and whores. Often a cart wouldpass near her, bearing some shaking scenery. Waiters in aprons weresprinkling sand on the flagstones between green shrubs. It all smelt ofabsinthe, cigars, and oysters.
She turned down a street; she recognised him by his curling hair thatescaped from beneath his hat.
Léon walked along the pavement. She followed him to the hotel. He wentup, opened the door, entered--What an embrace!
Then, after the kisses, the words gushed forth. They told each other thesorrows of the week, the presentiments, the anxiety for the letters; butnow everything was forgotten; they gazed into each other’s faces withvoluptuous laughs, and tender names.
The bed was large, of mahogany, in the shape of a boat. The curtainswere in red levantine, that hung from the ceiling and bulged out toomuch towards the bell-shaped bedside; and nothing in the world was solovely as her brown head and white skin standing out against this purplecolour, when, with a movement of shame, she crossed her bare arms,hiding her face in her hands.
The warm room, with its discreet carpet, its gay ornaments, and itscalm light, seemed made for the intimacies of passion. The curtain-rods,ending in arrows, their brass pegs, and the great balls of the fire-dogsshone suddenly when the sun came in. On the chimney between thecandelabra there were two of those pink shells in which one hears themurmur of the sea if one holds them to the ear.
How they loved that dear room, so full of gaiety, despite its ratherfaded splendour! They always found the furniture in the same place, andsometimes hairpins, that she had forgotten the Thursday before, underthe pedestal of the clock. They lunched by the fireside on a littleround table, inlaid with rosewood. Emma carved, put bits on his platewith all sorts of coquettish ways, and she laughed with a sonorous andlibertine laugh when the froth of the champagne ran over from theglass to the rings on her fingers. They were so completely lost inthe possession of each other that they thought themselves in theirown house, and that they would live there till death, like two spouseseternally young. They said “our room,” “our carpet,” she even said “myslippers,” a gift of Léon’s, a whim she had had. They were pink satin,bordered with swansdown. When she sat on his knees, her leg, then tooshort, hung in the air, and the dainty shoe, that had no back to it, washeld only by the toes to her bare foot.
He for the first time enjoyed the inexpressible delicacy of femininerefinements. He had never met this grace of language, this reserve ofclothing, these poses of the weary dove. He admired the exaltation ofher soul and the lace on her petticoat. Besides, was she not “a lady” and a married woman--a real mistress, in fine?
By the diversity of her humour, in turn mystical or mirthful, talkative,taciturn, passionate, careless, she awakened in him a thousand desires,called up instincts or memories. She was the mistress of all the novels,the heroine of all the dramas, the vague “she” of all the volumesof verse. He found again on her shoulder the amber colouring of the“Odalisque Bathing”; she had the long waist of feudal chatelaines, andshe resembled the “Pale Woman of Barcelona.” But above all she was theAngel!
Often looking at her, it seemed to him that his soul, escaping towardsher, spread like a wave about the outline of her head, and descendeddrawn down into the whiteness of her breast. He knelt on the groundbefore her, and with both elbows on her knees looked at her with asmile, his face upturned.
She bent over him, and murmured, as if choking with intoxication--
“Oh, do not move! do not speak! look at me! Something so sweet comesfrom your eyes that helps me so much!”
She called him “child.” “Child, do you love me?”
And she did not listen for his answer in the haste of her lips thatfastened to his mouth.
On the clock there was a bronze cupid, who smirked as he bent his armbeneath a golden garland. They had laughed at it many a time, but whenthey had to part everything seemed serious to them.
Motionless in front of each other, they kept repeating, “Till Thursday,till Thursday.”
Suddenly she seized his head between her hands, kissed him hurriedly onthe forehead, crying, “Adieu!” and rushed down the stairs.
She went to a hairdresser’s in the Rue de la Comedie to have her hairarranged. Night fell; the gas was lighted in the shop. She heard thebell at the theatre calling the mummers to the performance, and she saw,passing opposite, men with white faces and women in faded gowns going inat the stage-door.
It was hot in the room, small, and too low where the stove was hissingin the midst of wigs and pomades. The smell of the tongs, together withthe greasy hands that handled her head, soon stunned her, and she dozeda little in her wrapper. Often, as he did her hair, the man offered hertickets for a masked ball.
Then she went away. She went up the streets; reached the Croix-Rouge,put on her overshoes, that she had hidden in the morning under the seat,and sank into her place among the impatient passengers. Some got outat the foot of the hill. She remained alone in the carriage. At everyturning all the lights of the town were seen more and more completely,making a great luminous vapour about the dim houses. Emma knelt on thecushions and her eyes wandered over the dazzling light. She sobbed;called on Léon, sent him tender words and kisses lost in the wind.
On the hillside a poor devil wandered about with his stick in the midstof the diligences. A mass of rags covered his shoulders, and an oldstaved-in beaver, turned out like a basin, hid his face; but when hetook it off he discovered in the place of eyelids empty and bloodyorbits. The flesh hung in red shreds, and there flowed from it liquidsthat congealed into green scale down to the nose, whose black nostrilssniffed convulsively. To speak to you he threw back his head with anidiotic laugh; then his bluish eyeballs, rolling constantly, at thetemples beat against the edge of the open wound. He sang a little songas he followed the carriages--
     “Maids an the warmth of a summer day     Dream of love, and of love always”
And all the rest was about birds and sunshine and green leaves.
Sometimes he appeared suddenly behind Emma, bareheaded, and she drewback with a cry. Hivert made fun of him. He would advise him to get abooth at the Saint Romain fair, or else ask him, laughing, how his youngwoman was.
Often they had started when, with a sudden movement, his hat entered thediligence through the small window, while he clung with his other armto the footboard, between the wheels splashing mud. His voice, feebleat first and quavering, grew sharp; it resounded in the night like theindistinct moan of a vague distress; and through the ringing of thebells, the murmur of the trees, and the rumbling of the empty vehicle,it had a far-off sound that disturbed Emma. It went to the bottom ofher soul, like a whirlwind in an abyss, and carried her away into thedistances of a boundless melancholy. But Hivert, noticing a weightbehind, gave the blind man sharp cuts with his whip. The thong lashedhis wounds, and he fell back into the mud with a yell. Then thepassengers in the “Hirondelle” ended by falling asleep, some with openmouths, others with lowered chins, leaning against their neighbour’sshoulder, or with their arm passed through the strap, oscillatingregularly with the jolting of the carriage; and the reflection of thelantern swinging without, on the crupper of the wheeler; penetratinginto the interior through the chocolate calico curtains, threwsanguineous shadows over all these motionless people. Emma, drunk withgrief, shivered in her clothes, feeling her feet grow colder and colder,and death in her soul.
Charles at home was waiting for her; the “Hirondelle” was always lateon Thursdays. Madame arrived at last, and scarcely kissed the child. Thedinner was not ready. No matter! She excused the servant. This girl nowseemed allowed to do just as she liked.
Often her husband, noting her pallor, asked if she were unwell.
“No,” said Emma.
“But,” he replied, “you seem so strange this evening.”
“Oh, it’s nothing! nothing!”
There were even days when she had no sooner come in than she went up toher room; and Justin, happening to be there, moved about noiselessly,quicker at helping her than the best of maids. He put the matchesready, the candlestick, a book, arranged her nightgown, turned back thebedclothes.
“Come!” said she, “that will do. Now you can go.”
For he stood there, his hands hanging down and his eyes wide open, as ifenmeshed in the innumerable threads of a sudden reverie.
The following day was frightful, and those that came after still moreunbearable, because of her impatience to once again seize her happiness;an ardent lust, inflamed by the images of past experience, and thatburst forth freely on the seventh day beneath Léon’s caresses. Hisardours were hidden beneath outbursts of wonder and gratitude. Emmatasted this love in a discreet, absorbed fashion, maintained it by allthe artifices of her tenderness, and trembled a little lest it should belost later on.
She often said to him, with her sweet, melancholy voice--
“Ah! you too, you will leave me! You will marry! You will be like allthe others.”
He asked, “What others?”
“Why, like all men,” she replied. Then added, repulsing him with alanguid movement--
“You are all evil!”
One day, as they were talking philosophically of earthly disillusions,to experiment on his jealousy, or yielding, perhaps, to an over-strongneed to pour out her heart, she told him that formerly, before him, shehad loved someone.
“Not like you,” she went on quickly, protesting by the head of her childthat “nothing had passed between them.”
The young man believed her, but none the less questioned her to find outwhat he was.
“He was a ship’s captain, my dear.”
Was this not preventing any inquiry, and, at the same time, assuming ahigher ground through this pretended fascination exercised over a manwho must have been of warlike nature and accustomed to receive homage?
The clerk then felt the lowliness of his position; he longed forepaulettes, crosses, titles. All that would please her--he gathered thatfrom her spendthrift habits.
Emma nevertheless concealed many of these extravagant fancies, such asher wish to have a blue tilbury to drive into Rouen, drawn by anEnglish horse and driven by a groom in top-boots. It was Justin who hadinspired her with this whim, by begging her to take him into herservice as _valet-de-chambre_,[19] and if the privation of it did notlessen the pleasure of her arrival at each rendezvous, it certainlyaugmented the bitterness of the return.
[19] Manservant.
Often, when they talked together of Paris, she ended by murmuring, “Ah!how happy we should be there!”
“Are we not happy?” gently answered the young man passing his hands overher hair.
“Yes, that is true,” she said. “I am mad. Kiss me!”
To her husband she was more charming than ever. She made himpistachio-creams, and played him waltzes after dinner. So he thoughthimself the most fortunate of men and Emma was without uneasiness, when,one evening suddenly he said--
“It is Mademoiselle Lempereur, isn’t it, who gives you lessons?”
“Yes.”
“Well, I saw her just now,” Charles went on, “at Madame Liegeard’s. Ispoke to her about you, and she doesn’t know you.”
This was like a thunderclap. However, she replied quite naturally--
“Ah! no doubt she forgot my name.”
“But perhaps,” said the doctor, “there are several Demoiselles Lempereurat Rouen who are music-mistresses.”
“Possibly!” Then quickly--“But I have my receipts here. See!”
And she went to the writing-table, ransacked all the drawers, rummagedthe papers, and at last lost her head so completely that Charlesearnestly begged her not to take so much trouble about those wretchedreceipts.
“Oh, I will find them,” she said.
And, in fact, on the following Friday, as Charles was putting on oneof his boots in the dark cabinet where his clothes were kept, he felta piece of paper between the leather and his sock. He took it out andread--
“Received, for three months’ lessons and several pieces of music, thesum of sixty-three francs.--Felicie Lempereur, professor of music.”
“How the devil did it get into my boots?”
“It must,” she replied, “have fallen from the old box of bills that ison the edge of the shelf.”
From that moment her existence was but one long tissue of lies, in whichshe enveloped her love as in veils to hide it. It was a want, a mania,a pleasure carried to such an extent that if she said she had the daybefore walked on the right side of a road, one might know she had takenthe left.
One morning, when she had gone, as usual, rather lightly clothed, itsuddenly began to snow, and as Charles was watching the weather from thewindow, he caught sight of Monsieur Bournisien in the chaise of MonsieurTuvache, who was driving him to Rouen. Then he went down to give thepriest a thick shawl that he was to hand over to Emma as soon as hereached the “Croix-Rouge.” When he got to the inn, Monsieur Bournisienasked for the wife of the Yonville doctor. The landlady replied thatshe very rarely came to her establishment. So that evening, when herecognised Madame Bovary in the “Hirondelle,” the cure told her hisdilemma, without, however, appearing to attach much importance to it,for he began praising a preacher who was doing wonders at the Cathedral,and whom all the ladies were rushing to hear.
Still, if he did not ask for any explanation, others, later on, mightprove less discreet. So she thought well to get down each time at the“Croix-Rouge,” so that the good folk of her village who saw her on thestairs should suspect nothing.
One day, however, Monsieur Lheureux met her coming out of the Hotelde Boulogne on Léon’s arm; and she was frightened, thinking he wouldgossip. He was not such a fool. But three days after he came to herroom, shut the door, and said, “I must have some money.”
She declared she could not give him any. Lheureux burst intolamentations and reminded her of all the kindnesses he had shown her.
In fact, of the two bills signed by Charles, Emma up to the present hadpaid only one. As to the second, the shopkeeper, at her request, hadconsented to replace it by another, which again had been renewed for along date. Then he drew from his pocket a list of goods not paid for; towit, the curtains, the carpet, the material for the armchairs, severaldresses, and divers articles of dress, the bills for which amounted toabout two thousand francs.
She bowed her head. He went on--
“But if you haven’t any ready money, you have an estate.” And hereminded her of a miserable little hovel situated at Barneville, nearAumale, that brought in almost nothing. It had formerly been part of asmall farm sold by Monsieur Bovary senior; for Lheureux knew everything,even to the number of acres and the names of the neighbours.
“If I were in your place,” he said, “I should clear myself of my debts,and have money left over.”
She pointed out the difficulty of getting a purchaser. He held out thehope of finding one; but she asked him how she should manage to sell it.
“Haven’t you your power of attorney?” he replied.
The phrase came to her like a breath of fresh air. “Leave me the bill,” said Emma.
“Oh, it isn’t worth while,” answered Lheureux.
He came back the following week and boasted of having, after muchtrouble, at last discovered a certain Langlois, who, for a long time,had had an eye on the property, but without mentioning his price.
“Never mind the price!” she cried.
But they would, on the contrary, have to wait, to sound the fellow.The thing was worth a journey, and, as she could not undertake it, heoffered to go to the place to have an interview with Langlois. On hisreturn he announced that the purchaser proposed four thousand francs.
Emma was radiant at this news.
“Frankly,” he added, “that’s a good price.”
She drew half the sum at once, and when she was about to pay her accountthe shopkeeper said--
“It really grieves me, on my word! to see you depriving yourself all atonce of such a big sum as that.”
Then she looked at the bank-notes, and dreaming of the unlimited numberof rendezvous represented by those two thousand francs, she stammered--
“What! what!”
“Oh!” he went on, laughing good-naturedly, “one puts anything one likeson receipts. Don’t you think I know what household affairs are?” And helooked at her fixedly, while in his hand he held two long papers that heslid between his nails. At last, opening his pocket-book, he spread outon the table four bills to order, each for a thousand francs.
“Sign these,” he said, “and keep it all!”
She cried out, scandalised.
“But if I give you the surplus,” replied Monsieur Lheureux impudently,“is that not helping you?”
And taking a pen he wrote at the bottom of the account, “Received ofMadame Bovary four thousand francs.”
“Now who can trouble you, since in six months you’ll draw the arrearsfor your cottage, and I don’t make the last bill due till after you’vebeen paid?”
Emma grew rather confused in her calculations, and her ears tingledas if gold pieces, bursting from their bags, rang all round her onthe floor. At last Lheureux explained that he had a very good friend,Vincart, a broker at Rouen, who would discount these four bills. Thenhe himself would hand over to madame the remainder after the actual debtwas paid.
But instead of two thousand francs he brought only eighteen hundred, forthe friend Vincart (which was only fair) had deducted two hundred francsfor commission and discount. Then he carelessly asked for a receipt.
“You understand--in business--sometimes. And with the date, if youplease, with the date.”
A horizon of realisable whims opened out before Emma. She was prudentenough to lay by a thousand crowns, with which the first three billswere paid when they fell due; but the fourth, by chance, came to thehouse on a Thursday, and Charles, quite upset, patiently awaited hiswife’s return for an explanation.
If she had not told him about this bill, it was only to spare him suchdomestic worries; she sat on his knees, caressed him, cooed to him, gavehim a long enumeration of all the indispensable things that had been goton credit.
“Really, you must confess, considering the quantity, it isn’t too dear.”
Charles, at his wit’s end, soon had recourse to the eternal Lheureux,who swore he would arrange matters if the doctor would sign him twobills, one of which was for seven hundred francs, payable in threemonths. In order to arrange for this he wrote his mother a patheticletter. Instead of sending a reply she came herself; and when Emmawanted to know whether he had got anything out of her, “Yes,” hereplied; “but she wants to see the account.” The next morning atdaybreak Emma ran to Lheureux to beg him to make out another account fornot more than a thousand francs, for to show the one for four thousandit would be necessary to say that she had paid two-thirds, and confess,consequently, the sale of the estate--a negotiation admirably carriedout by the shopkeeper, and which, in fact, was only actually known lateron.
Despite the low price of each article, Madame Bovary senior, of course,thought the expenditure extravagant.
“Couldn’t you do without a carpet? Why have recovered the arm-chairs? Inmy time there was a single arm-chair in a house, for elderly persons--atany rate it was so at my mother’s, who was a good woman, I can tell you.Everybody can’t be rich! No fortune can hold out against waste! I shouldbe ashamed to coddle myself as you do! And yet I am old. I need lookingafter. And there! there! fitting up gowns! fallals! What! silk forlining at two francs, when you can get jaconet for ten sous, or even foreight, that would do well enough!”
Emma, lying on a lounge, replied as quietly as possible--“Ah! Madame,enough! enough!”
The other went on lecturing her, predicting they would end in theworkhouse. But it was Bovary’s fault. Luckily he had promised to destroythat power of attorney.
“What?”
“Ah! he swore he would,” went on the good woman.
Emma opened the window, called Charles, and the poor fellow was obligedto confess the promise torn from him by his mother.
Emma disappeared, then came back quickly, and majestically handed her athick piece of paper.
“Thank you,” said the old woman. And she threw the power of attorneyinto the fire.
Emma began to laugh, a strident, piercing, continuous laugh; she had anattack of hysterics.
“Oh, my God!” cried Charles. “Ah! you really are wrong! You come hereand make scenes with her!”
His mother, shrugging her shoulders, declared it was “all put on.”
But Charles, rebelling for the first time, took his wife’s part, so thatMadame Bovary, senior, said she would leave. She went the very next day,and on the threshold, as he was trying to detain her, she replied--
“No, no! You love her better than me, and you are right. It is natural.For the rest, so much the worse! You will see. Good day--for I am notlikely to come soon again, as you say, to make scenes.”
Charles nevertheless was very crestfallen before Emma, who did not hidethe resentment she still felt at his want of confidence, and it neededmany prayers before she would consent to have another power of attorney.He even accompanied her to Monsieur Guillaumin to have a second one,just like the other, drawn up.
“I understand,” said the notary; “a man of science can’t be worried withthe practical details of life.”
And Charles felt relieved by this comfortable reflection, which gave hisweakness the flattering appearance of higher pre-occupation.
And what an outburst the next Thursday at the hotel in their room withLéon! She laughed, cried, sang, sent for sherbets, wanted to smokecigarettes, seemed to him wild and extravagant, but adorable, superb.
He did not know what recreation of her whole being drove her more andmore to plunge into the pleasures of life. She was becoming irritable,greedy, voluptuous; and she walked about the streets with him carryingher head high, without fear, so she said, of compromising herself.At times, however, Emma shuddered at the sudden thought of meetingRodolphe, for it seemed to her that, although they were separatedforever, she was not completely free from her subjugation to him.
One night she did not return to Yonville at all. Charles lost his headwith anxiety, and little Berthe would not go to bed without her mamma,and sobbed enough to break her heart. Justin had gone out searching theroad at random. Monsieur Homais even had left his pharmacy.
At last, at eleven o’clock, able to bear it no longer, Charlesharnessed his chaise, jumped in, whipped up his horse, and reached the“Croix-Rouge” about two o’clock in the morning. No one there! He thoughtthat the clerk had perhaps seen her; but where did he live? Happily,Charles remembered his employer’s address, and rushed off there.
Day was breaking, and he could distinguish the escutcheons over thedoor, and knocked. Someone, without opening the door, shouted out therequired information, adding a few insults to those who disturb peoplein the middle of the night.
The house inhabited by the clerk had neither bell, knocker, nor porter.Charles knocked loudly at the shutters with his hands. A policemanhappened to pass by. Then he was frightened, and went away.
“I am mad,” he said; “no doubt they kept her to dinner at MonsieurLormeaux’.” But the Lormeaux no longer lived at Rouen.
“She probably stayed to look after Madame Dubreuil. Why, Madame Dubreuilhas been dead these ten months! Where can she be?”
An idea occurred to him. At a cafe he asked for a Directory, andhurriedly looked for the name of Mademoiselle Lempereur, who lived atNo. 74 Rue de la Renelle-des-Maroquiniers.
As he was turning into the street, Emma herself appeared at the otherend of it. He threw himself upon her rather than embraced her, crying--
“What kept you yesterday?”
“I was not well.”
“What was it? Where? How?”
She passed her hand over her forehead and answered, “At MademoiselleLempereur’s.”
“I was sure of it! I was going there.”
“Oh, it isn’t worth while,” said Emma. “She went out just now; but forthe future don’t worry. I do not feel free, you see, if I know that theleast delay upsets you like this.”
This was a sort of permission that she gave herself, so as to getperfect freedom in her escapades. And she profited by it freely, fully.When she was seized with the desire to see Léon, she set out upon anypretext; and as he was not expecting her on that day, she went to fetchhim at his office.
It was a great delight at first, but soon he no longer concealed thetruth, which was, that his master complained very much about theseinterruptions.
“Pshaw! come along,” she said.
And he slipped out.
She wanted him to dress all in black, and grow a pointed beard, tolook like the portraits of Louis XIII. She wanted to see his lodgings;thought them poor. He blushed at them, but she did not notice this, thenadvised him to buy some curtains like hers, and as he objected to theexpense--
“Ah! ah! you care for your money,” she said laughing.
Each time Léon had to tell her everything that he had done since theirlast meeting. She asked him for some verses--some verses “for herself,” a “love poem” in honour of her. But he never succeeded in getting arhyme for the second verse; and at last ended by copying a sonnet ina “Keepsake.” This was less from vanity than from the one desire ofpleasing her. He did not question her ideas; he accepted all her tastes;he was rather becoming her mistress than she his. She had tender wordsand kisses that thrilled his soul. Where could she have learnt thiscorruption almost incorporeal in the strength of its profanity anddissimulation?
Chapter Six
During the journeys he made to see her, Léon had often dined at thechemist’s, and he felt obliged from politeness to invite him in turn.
“With pleasure!” Monsieur Homais replied; “besides, I must invigoratemy mind, for I am getting rusty here. We’ll go to the theatre, to therestaurant; we’ll make a night of it.”
“Oh, my dear!” tenderly murmured Madame Homais, alarmed at the vagueperils he was preparing to brave.
“Well, what? Do you think I’m not sufficiently ruining my health livinghere amid the continual emanations of the pharmacy? But there! that isthe way with women! They are jealous of science, and then are opposed toour taking the most legitimate distractions. No matter! Count uponme. One of these days I shall turn up at Rouen, and we’ll go the pacetogether.”
The druggist would formerly have taken good care not to use such anexpression, but he was cultivating a gay Parisian style, which hethought in the best taste; and, like his neighbour, Madame Bovary, hequestioned the clerk curiously about the customs of the capital; heeven talked slang to dazzle the bourgeois, saying bender, crummy, dandy,macaroni, the cheese, cut my stick and “I’ll hook it,” for “I am going.”
So one Thursday Emma was surprised to meet Monsieur Homais in thekitchen of the “Lion d’Or,” wearing a traveller’s costume, that is tosay, wrapped in an old cloak which no one knew he had, while he carrieda valise in one hand and the foot-warmer of his establishment in theother. He had confided his intentions to no one, for fear of causing thepublic anxiety by his absence.
The idea of seeing again the place where his youth had been spent nodoubt excited him, for during the whole journey he never ceased talking,and as soon as he had arrived, he jumped quickly out of the diligenceto go in search of Léon. In vain the clerk tried to get rid of him.Monsieur Homais dragged him off to the large Cafe de la Normandie,which he entered majestically, not raising his hat, thinking it veryprovincial to uncover in any public place.
Emma waited for Léon three quarters of an hour. At last she ran tohis office; and, lost in all sorts of conjectures, accusing him ofindifference, and reproaching herself for her weakness, she spent theafternoon, her face pressed against the window-panes.
At two o’clock they were still at a table opposite each other. The largeroom was emptying; the stove-pipe, in the shape of a palm-tree, spreadits gilt leaves over the white ceiling, and near them, outside thewindow, in the bright sunshine, a little fountain gurgled in a whitebasin, where; in the midst of watercress and asparagus, three torpidlobsters stretched across to some quails that lay heaped up in a pile ontheir sides.
Homais was enjoying himself. Although he was even more intoxicated with theluxury than the rich fare, the Pommard wine all the same rather excited hisfaculties; and when the omelette _au rhum_[20] appeared, he began propoundingimmoral theories about women. What seduced him above all else was chic. Headmired an elegant toilette in a well-furnished apartment, and as to bodilyqualities, he didn’t dislike a young girl.
[20] In rum.
Léon watched the clock in despair. The druggist went on drinking,eating, and talking.
“You must be very lonely,” he said suddenly, “here at Rouen. To be sureyour lady-love doesn’t live far away.”
And the other blushed--
“Come now, be frank. Can you deny that at Yonville--”
The young man stammered something.
“At Madame Bovary’s, you’re not making love to--”
“To whom?”
“The servant!”
He was not joking; but vanity getting the better of all prudence, Léon,in spite of himself protested. Besides, he only liked dark women.
“I approve of that,” said the chemist; “they have more passion.”
And whispering into his friend’s ear, he pointed out the symptoms bywhich one could find out if a woman had passion. He even launched intoan ethnographic digression: the German was vapourish, the French womanlicentious, the Italian passionate.
“And negresses?” asked the clerk.
“They are an artistic taste!” said Homais. “Waiter! two cups of coffee!”
“Are we going?” at last asked Léon impatiently.
“Ja!”
But before leaving he wanted to see the proprietor of the establishmentand made him a few compliments. Then the young man, to be alone, allegedhe had some business engagement.
“Ah! I will escort you,” said Homais.
And all the while he was walking through the streets with him he talkedof his wife, his children; of their future, and of his business; toldhim in what a decayed condition it had formerly been, and to what adegree of perfection he had raised it.
Arrived in front of the Hotel de Boulogne, Léon left him abruptly, ranup the stairs, and found his mistress in great excitement. At mention ofthe chemist she flew into a passion. He, however, piled up good reasons;it wasn’t his fault; didn’t she know Homais--did she believe that hewould prefer his company? But she turned away; he drew her back, and,sinking on his knees, clasped her waist with his arms in a languorouspose, full of concupiscence and supplication.
She was standing up, her large flashing eyes looked at him seriously,almost terribly. Then tears obscured them, her red eyelids were lowered,she gave him her hands, and Léon was pressing them to his lips when aservant appeared to tell the gentleman that he was wanted.
“You will come back?” she said.
“Yes.”
“But when?”
“Immediately.”
“It’s a trick,” said the chemist, when he saw Léon. “I wanted tointerrupt this visit, that seemed to me to annoy you. Let’s go and havea glass of garus at Bridoux’.”
Léon vowed that he must get back to his office. Then the druggist jokedhim about quill-drivers and the law.
“Leave Cujas and Barthole alone a bit. Who the devil prevents you? Be aman! Let’s go to Bridoux’. You’ll see his dog. It’s very interesting.”
And as the clerk still insisted--
“I’ll go with you. I’ll read a paper while I wait for you, or turn overthe leaves of a ‘Code.’”
Léon, bewildered by Emma’s anger, Monsieur Homais’ chatter, and,perhaps, by the heaviness of the luncheon, was undecided, and, as itwere, fascinated by the chemist, who kept repeating--
“Let’s go to Bridoux’. It’s just by here, in the Rue Malpalu.”
Then, through cowardice, through stupidity, through that indefinablefeeling that drags us into the most distasteful acts, he allowedhimself to be led off to Bridoux’, whom they found in his small yard,superintending three workmen, who panted as they turned the largewheel of a machine for making seltzer-water. Homais gave them some goodadvice. He embraced Bridoux; they took some garus. Twenty times Léontried to escape, but the other seized him by the arm saying--
“Presently! I’m coming! We’ll go to the ‘Fanal de Rouen’ to see thefellows there. I’ll introduce you to Thornassin.”
At last he managed to get rid of him, and rushed straight to the hotel.Emma was no longer there. She had just gone in a fit of anger. Shedetested him now. This failing to keep their rendezvous seemed to her aninsult, and she tried to rake up other reasons to separate herself fromhim. He was incapable of heroism, weak, banal, more spiritless than awoman, avaricious too, and cowardly.
Then, growing calmer, she at length discovered that she had, no doubt,calumniated him. But the disparaging of those we love always alienatesus from them to some extent. We must not touch our idols; the giltsticks to our fingers.
They gradually came to talking more frequently of matters outside theirlove, and in the letters that Emma wrote him she spoke of flowers,verses, the moon and the stars, naive resources of a waning passionstriving to keep itself alive by all external aids. She was constantlypromising herself a profound felicity on her next journey. Thenshe confessed to herself that she felt nothing extraordinary. Thisdisappointment quickly gave way to a new hope, and Emma returned to himmore inflamed, more eager than ever. She undressed brutally, tearing offthe thin laces of her corset that nestled around her hips like a glidingsnake. She went on tiptoe, barefooted, to see once more that thedoor was closed, then, pale, serious, and, without speaking, with onemovement, she threw herself upon his breast with a long shudder.
Yet there was upon that brow covered with cold drops, on those quiveringlips, in those wild eyes, in the strain of those arms, something vagueand dreary that seemed to Léon to glide between them subtly as if toseparate them.
He did not dare to question her; but, seeing her so skilled, she musthave passed, he thought, through every experience of suffering and ofpleasure. What had once charmed now frightened him a little. Besides, herebelled against his absorption, daily more marked, by her personality.He begrudged Emma this constant victory. He even strove not to love her;then, when he heard the creaking of her boots, he turned coward, likedrunkards at the sight of strong drinks.
She did not fail, in truth, to lavish all sorts of attentions upon him,from the delicacies of food to the coquettries of dress and languishinglooks. She brought roses to her breast from Yonville, which she threwinto his face; was anxious about his health, gave him advice as to hisconduct; and, in order the more surely to keep her hold on him, hopingperhaps that heaven would take her part, she tied a medal of theVirgin round his neck. She inquired like a virtuous mother about hiscompanions. She said to him--
“Don’t see them; don’t go out; think only of ourselves; love me!”
She would have liked to be able to watch over his life; and the ideaoccurred to her of having him followed in the streets. Near the hotelthere was always a kind of loafer who accosted travellers, and who wouldnot refuse. But her pride revolted at this.
“Bah! so much the worse. Let him deceive me! What does it matter to me?As If I cared for him!”
One day, when they had parted early and she was returning alone alongthe boulevard, she saw the walls of her convent; then she sat down on aform in the shade of the elm-trees. How calm that time had been! How shelonged for the ineffable sentiments of love that she had tried to figureto herself out of books! The first month of her marriage, her rides inthe wood, the viscount that waltzed, and Lagardy singing, all repassedbefore her eyes. And Léon suddenly appeared to her as far off as theothers.
“Yet I love him,” she said to herself.
No matter! She was not happy--she never had been. Whence came thisinsufficiency in life--this instantaneous turning to decay of everythingon which she leant? But if there were somewhere a being strong andbeautiful, a valiant nature, full at once of exaltation and refinement,a poet’s heart in an angel’s form, a lyre with sounding chords ringingout elegiac epithalamia to heaven, why, perchance, should she not findhim? Ah! how impossible! Besides, nothing was worth the trouble ofseeking it; everything was a lie. Every smile hid a yawn of boredom,every joy a curse, all pleasure satiety, and the sweetest kisses leftupon your lips only the unattainable desire for a greater delight.
A metallic clang droned through the air, and four strokes were heardfrom the convent-clock. Four o’clock! And it seemed to her that she hadbeen there on that form an eternity. But an infinity of passions may becontained in a minute, like a crowd in a small space.
Emma lived all absorbed in hers, and troubled no more about moneymatters than an archduchess.
Once, however, a wretched-looking man, rubicund and bald, came to herhouse, saying he had been sent by Monsieur Vincart of Rouen. He took outthe pins that held together the side-pockets of his long green overcoat,stuck them into his sleeve, and politely handed her a paper.
It was a bill for seven hundred francs, signed by her, and whichLheureux, in spite of all his professions, had paid away to Vincart. Shesent her servant for him. He could not come. Then the stranger, whohad remained standing, casting right and left curious glances, that histhick, fair eyebrows hid, asked with a naive air--
“What answer am I to take Monsieur Vincart?”
“Oh,” said Emma, “tell him that I haven’t it. I will send next week; hemust wait; yes, till next week.”
And the fellow went without another word.
But the next day at twelve o’clock she received a summons, and the sightof the stamped paper, on which appeared several times in large letters,“Maitre Hareng, bailiff at Buchy,” so frightened her that she rushed inhot haste to the linendraper’s. She found him in his shop, doing up aparcel.
“Your obedient!” he said; “I am at your service.”
But Lheureux, all the same, went on with his work, helped by a younggirl of about thirteen, somewhat hunch-backed, who was at once his clerkand his servant.
Then, his clogs clattering on the shop-boards, he went up in frontof Madame Bovary to the first door, and introduced her into a narrowcloset, where, in a large bureau in sapon-wood, lay some ledgers,protected by a horizontal padlocked iron bar. Against the wall, undersome remnants of calico, one glimpsed a safe, but of such dimensionsthat it must contain something besides bills and money. MonsieurLheureux, in fact, went in for pawnbroking, and it was there that he hadput Madame Bovary’s gold chain, together with the earrings of poor oldTellier, who, at last forced to sell out, had bought a meagre storeof grocery at Quincampoix, where he was dying of catarrh amongst hiscandles, that were less yellow than his face.
Lheureux sat down in a large cane arm-chair, saying: “What news?”
“See!”
And she showed him the paper.
“Well how can I help it?”
Then she grew angry, reminding him of the promise he had given not topay away her bills. He acknowledged it.
“But I was pressed myself; the knife was at my own throat.”
“And what will happen now?” she went on.
“Oh, it’s very simple; a judgment and then a distraint--that’s aboutit!”
Emma kept down a desire to strike him, and asked gently if there was noway of quieting Monsieur Vincart.
“I dare say! Quiet Vincart! You don’t know him; he’s more ferocious thanan Arab!”
Still Monsieur Lheureux must interfere.
“Well, listen. It seems to me so far I’ve been very good to you.” Andopening one of his ledgers, “See,” he said. Then running up the pagewith his finger, “Let’s see! let’s see! August 3d, two hundred francs;June 17th, a hundred and fifty; March 23d, forty-six. In April--”
He stopped, as if afraid of making some mistake.
“Not to speak of the bills signed by Monsieur Bovary, one for sevenhundred francs, and another for three hundred. As to your littleinstallments, with the interest, why, there’s no end to ‘em; one getsquite muddled over ‘em. I’ll have nothing more to do with it.”
She wept; she even called him “her good Monsieur Lheureux.” But healways fell back upon “that rascal Vincart.” Besides, he hadn’t a brassfarthing; no one was paying him now-a-days; they were eating his coatoff his back; a poor shopkeeper like him couldn’t advance money.
Emma was silent, and Monsieur Lheureux, who was biting the feathers of aquill, no doubt became uneasy at her silence, for he went on--
“Unless one of these days I have something coming in, I might--”
“Besides,” said she, “as soon as the balance of Barneville--”
“What!”
And on hearing that Langlois had not yet paid he seemed much surprised.Then in a honied voice--
“And we agree, you say?”
“Oh! to anything you like.”
On this he closed his eyes to reflect, wrote down a few figures, anddeclaring it would be very difficult for him, that the affair was shady,and that he was being bled, he wrote out four bills for two hundred andfifty francs each, to fall due month by month.
“Provided that Vincart will listen to me! However, it’s settled. I don’tplay the fool; I’m straight enough.”
Next he carelessly showed her several new goods, not one of which,however, was in his opinion worthy of madame.
“When I think that there’s a dress at threepence-halfpenny a yard, andwarranted fast colours! And yet they actually swallow it! Of course youunderstand one doesn’t tell them what it really is!” He hoped by thisconfession of dishonesty to others to quite convince her of his probityto her.
Then he called her back to show her three yards of guipure that he hadlately picked up “at a sale.”
“Isn’t it lovely?” said Lheureux. “It is very much used now for thebacks of arm-chairs. It’s quite the rage.”
And, more ready than a juggler, he wrapped up the guipure in some bluepaper and put it in Emma’s hands.
“But at least let me know--”
“Yes, another time,” he replied, turning on his heel.
That same evening she urged Bovary to write to his mother, to ask herto send as quickly as possible the whole of the balance due from thefather’s estate. The mother-in-law replied that she had nothing more,the winding up was over, and there was due to them besides Barneville anincome of six hundred francs, that she would pay them punctually.
Then Madame Bovary sent in accounts to two or three patients, and shemade large use of this method, which was very successful. She was alwayscareful to add a postscript: “Do not mention this to my husband; youknow how proud he is. Excuse me. Yours obediently.” There were somecomplaints; she intercepted them.
To get money she began selling her old gloves, her old hats, the oldodds and ends, and she bargained rapaciously, her peasant blood standingher in good stead. Then on her journey to town she picked up nick-nackssecondhand, that, in default of anyone else, Monsieur Lheureux wouldcertainly take off her hands. She bought ostrich feathers, Chineseporcelain, and trunks; she borrowed from Félicité, from MadameLefrancois, from the landlady at the Croix-Rouge, from everybody, nomatter where.
With the money she at last received from Barneville she paid two bills;the other fifteen hundred francs fell due. She renewed the bills, andthus it was continually.
Sometimes, it is true, she tried to make a calculation, but shediscovered things so exorbitant that she could not believe thempossible. Then she recommenced, soon got confused, gave it all up, andthought no more about it.
The house was very dreary now. Tradesmen were seen leaving it with angryfaces. Handkerchiefs were lying about on the stoves, and little Berthe,to the great scandal of Madame Homais, wore stockings with holes inthem. If Charles timidly ventured a remark, she answered roughly that itwasn’t her fault.
What was the meaning of all these fits of temper? He explainedeverything through her old nervous illness, and reproaching himself withhaving taken her infirmities for faults, accused himself of egotism, andlonged to go and take her in his arms.
“Ah, no!” he said to himself; “I should worry her.”
And he did not stir.
After dinner he walked about alone in the garden; he took little Bertheon his knees, and unfolding his medical journal, tried to teach herto read. But the child, who never had any lessons, soon looked up withlarge, sad eyes and began to cry. Then he comforted her; went to fetchwater in her can to make rivers on the sand path, or broke off branchesfrom the privet hedges to plant trees in the beds. This did not spoilthe garden much, all choked now with long weeds. They owed Lestiboudoisfor so many days. Then the child grew cold and asked for her mother.
“Call the servant,” said Charles. “You know, dearie, that mamma does notlike to be disturbed.”
Autumn was setting in, and the leaves were already falling, as they didtwo years ago when she was ill. Where would it all end? And he walked upand down, his hands behind his back.
Madame was in her room, which no one entered. She stayed there allday long, torpid, half dressed, and from time to time burning Turkishpastilles which she had bought at Rouen in an Algerian’s shop. In ordernot to have at night this sleeping man stretched at her side, by dint ofmanoeuvring, she at last succeeded in banishing him to the second floor,while she read till morning extravagant books, full of pictures oforgies and thrilling situations. Often, seized with fear, she cried out,and Charles hurried to her.
“Oh, go away!” she would say.
Or at other times, consumed more ardently than ever by that inner flameto which adultery added fuel, panting, tremulous, all desire, she threwopen her window, breathed in the cold air, shook loose in the wind hermasses of hair, too heavy, and, gazing upon the stars, longed for someprincely love. She thought of him, of Léon. She would then have givenanything for a single one of those meetings that surfeited her.
These were her gala days. She wanted them to be sumptuous, and when healone could not pay the expenses, she made up the deficit liberally,which happened pretty well every time. He tried to make her understandthat they would be quite as comfortable somewhere else, in a smallerhotel, but she always found some objection.
One day she drew six small silver-gilt spoons from her bag (they wereold Roualt’s wedding present), begging him to pawn them at once for her,and Léon obeyed, though the proceeding annoyed him. He was afraid ofcompromising himself.
Then, on, reflection, he began to think his mistress’s ways were growingodd, and that they were perhaps not wrong in wishing to separate himfrom her.
In fact someone had sent his mother a long anonymous letter to warn herthat he was “ruining himself with a married woman,” and the good lady atonce conjuring up the eternal bugbear of families, the vague perniciouscreature, the siren, the monster, who dwells fantastically in depths oflove, wrote to Lawyer Dubocage, his employer, who behaved perfectly inthe affair. He kept him for three quarters of an hour trying to openhis eyes, to warn him of the abyss into which he was falling. Suchan intrigue would damage him later on, when he set up for himself. Heimplored him to break with her, and, if he would not make this sacrificein his own interest, to do it at least for his, Dubocage’s sake.
At last Léon swore he would not see Emma again, and he reproachedhimself with not having kept his word, considering all the worry andlectures this woman might still draw down upon him, without reckoningthe jokes made by his companions as they sat round the stove in themorning. Besides, he was soon to be head clerk; it was time to settledown. So he gave up his flute, exalted sentiments, and poetry; for everybourgeois in the flush of his youth, were it but for a day, a moment,has believed himself capable of immense passions, of lofty enterprises.The most mediocre libertine has dreamed of sultanas; every notary bearswithin him the debris of a poet.
He was bored now when Emma suddenly began to sob on his breast, and hisheart, like the people who can only stand a certain amount of music,dozed to the sound of a love whose delicacies he no longer noted.
They knew one another too well for any of those surprises of possessionthat increase its joys a hundred-fold. She was as sick of him as hewas weary of her. Emma found again in adultery all the platitudes ofmarriage.
But how to get rid of him? Then, though she might feel humiliated atthe baseness of such enjoyment, she clung to it from habit or fromcorruption, and each day she hungered after them the more, exhaustingall felicity in wishing for too much of it. She accused Léon of herbaffled hopes, as if he had betrayed her; and she even longed for somecatastrophe that would bring about their separation, since she had notthe courage to make up her mind to it herself.
She none the less went on writing him love letters, in virtue of thenotion that a woman must write to her lover.
But whilst she wrote it was another man she saw, a phantom fashioned outof her most ardent memories, of her finest reading, her strongestlusts, and at last he became so real, so tangible, that she palpitatedwondering, without, however, the power to imagine him clearly, so lostwas he, like a god, beneath the abundance of his attributes. He dwelt inthat azure land where silk ladders hang from balconies under the breathof flowers, in the light of the moon. She felt him near her; he wascoming, and would carry her right away in a kiss.
Then she fell back exhausted, for these transports of vague love weariedher more than great debauchery.
She now felt constant ache all over her. Often she even receivedsummonses, stamped paper that she barely looked at. She would have likednot to be alive, or to be always asleep.
On Mid-Lent she did not return to Yonville, but in the evening went toa masked ball. She wore velvet breeches, red stockings, a club wig, andthree-cornered hat cocked on one side. She danced all night to the wildtones of the trombones; people gathered round her, and in the morningshe found herself on the steps of the theatre together with five or sixmasks, _débardeuses_[21] and sailors, Léon’s comrades, who were talkingabout having supper.
[21] People dressed as longshoremen.
The neighbouring cafes were full. They caught sight of one on theharbour, a very indifferent restaurant, whose proprietor showed them toa little room on the fourth floor.
The men were whispering in a corner, no doubt consorting about expenses.There were a clerk, two medical students, and a shopman--what companyfor her! As to the women, Emma soon perceived from the tone of theirvoices that they must almost belong to the lowest class. Then she wasfrightened, pushed back her chair, and cast down her eyes.
The others began to eat; she ate nothing. Her head was on fire, her eyessmarted, and her skin was ice-cold. In her head she seemed to feel thefloor of the ball-room rebounding again beneath the rhythmical pulsationof the thousands of dancing feet. And now the smell of the punch, thesmoke of the cigars, made her giddy. She fainted, and they carried herto the window.
Day was breaking, and a great stain of purple colour broadened outin the pale horizon over the St. Catherine hills. The livid river wasshivering in the wind; there was no one on the bridges; the street lampswere going out.
She revived, and began thinking of Berthe asleep yonder in the servant’sroom. Then a cart filled with long strips of iron passed by, and made adeafening metallic vibration against the walls of the houses.
She slipped away suddenly, threw off her costume, told Léon she must getback, and at last was alone at the Hotel de Boulogne. Everything, evenherself, was now unbearable to her. She wished that, taking wing like abird, she could fly somewhere, far away to regions of purity, and theregrow young again.
She went out, crossed the Boulevard, the Place Cauchoise, and theFaubourg, as far as an open street that overlooked some gardens. Shewalked rapidly; the fresh air calming her; and, little by little, thefaces of the crowd, the masks, the quadrilles, the lights, the supper,those women, all disappeared like mists fading away. Then, reaching the“Croix-Rouge,” she threw herself on the bed in her little room on thesecond floor, where there were pictures of the “Tour de Nesle.” At fouro’clock Hivert awoke her.
When she got home, Félicité showed her behind the clock a grey paper.She read--
“In virtue of the seizure in execution of a judgment.”
What judgment? As a matter of fact, the evening before another paperhad been brought that she had not yet seen, and she was stunned by thesewords--
“By order of the king, law, and justice, to Madame Bovary.” Then,skipping several lines, she read, “Within twenty-four hours, withoutfail--” But what? “To pay the sum of eight thousand francs.” And therewas even at the bottom, “She will be constrained thereto by everyform of law, and notably by a writ of distraint on her furniture andeffects.”
What was to be done? In twenty-four hours--tomorrow. Lheureux, shethought, wanted to frighten her again; for she saw through all hisdevices, the object of his kindnesses. What reassured her was the verymagnitude of the sum.
However, by dint of buying and not paying, of borrowing, signing bills,and renewing these bills that grew at each new falling-in, she had endedby preparing a capital for Monsieur Lheureux which he was impatientlyawaiting for his speculations.
She presented herself at his place with an offhand air.
“You know what has happened to me? No doubt it’s a joke!”
“How so?”
He turned away slowly, and, folding his arms, said to her--
“My good lady, did you think I should go on to all eternity being yourpurveyor and banker, for the love of God? Now be just. I must get backwhat I’ve laid out. Now be just.”
She cried out against the debt.
“Ah! so much the worse. The court has admitted it. There’s a judgment.It’s been notified to you. Besides, it isn’t my fault. It’s Vincart’s.”
“Could you not--?”
“Oh, nothing whatever.”
“But still, now talk it over.”
And she began beating about the bush; she had known nothing about it; itwas a surprise.
“Whose fault is that?” said Lheureux, bowing ironically. “While I’mslaving like a nigger, you go gallivanting about.”
“Ah! no lecturing.”
“It never does any harm,” he replied.
She turned coward; she implored him; she even pressed her pretty whiteand slender hand against the shopkeeper’s knee.
“There, that’ll do! Anyone’d think you wanted to seduce me!”
“You are a wretch!” she cried.
“Oh, oh! go it! go it!”
“I will show you up. I shall tell my husband.”
“All right! I too. I’ll show your husband something.”
And Lheureux drew from his strong box the receipt for eighteen hundredfrancs that she had given him when Vincart had discounted the bills.
“Do you think,” he added, “that he’ll not understand your little theft,the poor dear man?”
She collapsed, more overcome than if felled by the blow of a pole-axe.He was walking up and down from the window to the bureau, repeating allthe while--
“Ah! I’ll show him! I’ll show him!” Then he approached her, and in asoft voice said--
“It isn’t pleasant, I know; but, after all, no bones are broken, and,since that is the only way that is left for you paying back my money--”
“But where am I to get any?” said Emma, wringing her hands.
“Bah! when one has friends like you!”
And he looked at her in so keen, so terrible a fashion, that sheshuddered to her very heart.
“I promise you,” she said, “to sign--”
“I’ve enough of your signatures.”
“I will sell something.”
“Get along!” he said, shrugging his shoulders; “you’ve not gotanything.”
And he called through the peep-hole that looked down into the shop--
“Annette, don’t forget the three coupons of No. 14.”
The servant appeared. Emma understood, and asked how much money would bewanted to put a stop to the proceedings.
“It is too late.”
“But if I brought you several thousand francs--a quarter of the sum--athird--perhaps the whole?”
“No; it’s no use!”
And he pushed her gently towards the staircase.
“I implore you, Monsieur Lheureux, just a few days more!” She wassobbing.
“There! tears now!”
“You are driving me to despair!”
“What do I care?” said he, shutting the door.
Chapter Seven
She was stoical the next day when Maitre Hareng, the bailiff, with twoassistants, presented himself at her house to draw up the inventory forthe distraint.
They began with Bovary’s consulting-room, and did not write downthe phrenological head, which was considered an “instrument of hisprofession”; but in the kitchen they counted the plates; the saucepans,the chairs, the candlesticks, and in the bedroom all the nick-nacks onthe whatnot. They examined her dresses, the linen, the dressing-room;and her whole existence to its most intimate details, was, like a corpseon whom a post-mortem is made, outspread before the eyes of these threemen.
Maitre Hareng, buttoned up in his thin black coat, wearing a whitechoker and very tight foot-straps, repeated from time to time--“Allowme, madame. You allow me?” Often he uttered exclamations. “Charming!very pretty.” Then he began writing again, dipping his pen into the horninkstand in his left hand.
When they had done with the rooms they went up to the attic. She kept adesk there in which Rodolphe’s letters were locked. It had to be opened.
“Ah! a correspondence,” said Maitre Hareng, with a discreet smile. “Butallow me, for I must make sure the box contains nothing else.” And hetipped up the papers lightly, as if to shake out napoleons. Then shegrew angered to see this coarse hand, with fingers red and pulpy likeslugs, touching these pages against which her heart had beaten.
They went at last. Félicité came back. Emma had sent her out to watchfor Bovary in order to keep him off, and they hurriedly installed theman in possession under the roof, where he swore he would remain.
During the evening Charles seemed to her careworn. Emma watched him witha look of anguish, fancying she saw an accusation in every line of hisface. Then, when her eyes wandered over the chimney-piece ornamentedwith Chinese screens, over the large curtains, the armchairs, allthose things, in a word, that had, softened the bitterness of her life,remorse seized her or rather an immense regret, that, far from crushing,irritated her passion. Charles placidly poked the fire, both his feet onthe fire-dogs.
Once the man, no doubt bored in his hiding-place, made a slight noise.
“Is anyone walking upstairs?” said Charles.
“No,” she replied; “it is a window that has been left open, and israttling in the wind.”
The next day, Sunday, she went to Rouen to call on all the brokers whosenames she knew. They were at their country-places or on journeys. Shewas not discouraged; and those whom she did manage to see she asked formoney, declaring she must have some, and that she would pay it back.Some laughed in her face; all refused.
At two o’clock she hurried to Léon, and knocked at the door. No oneanswered. At length he appeared.
“What brings you here?”
“Do I disturb you?”
“No; but--” And he admitted that his landlord didn’t like his having“women” there.
“I must speak to you,” she went on.
Then he took down the key, but she stopped him.
“No, no! Down there, in our home!”
And they went to their room at the Hotel de Boulogne.
On arriving she drank off a large glass of water. She was very pale. Shesaid to him--
“Léon, you will do me a service?”
And, shaking him by both hands that she grasped tightly, she added--
“Listen, I want eight thousand francs.”
“But you are mad!”
“Not yet.”
And thereupon, telling him the story of the distraint, she explainedher distress to him; for Charles knew nothing of it; her mother-in-lawdetested her; old Rouault could do nothing; but he, Léon, he would setabout finding this indispensable sum.
“How on earth can I?”
“What a coward you are!” she cried.
Then he said stupidly, “You are exaggerating the difficulty. Perhaps,with a thousand crowns or so the fellow could be stopped.”
All the greater reason to try and do something; it was impossible thatthey could not find three thousand francs. Besides, Léon, could besecurity instead of her.
“Go, try, try! I will love you so!”
He went out, and came back at the end of an hour, saying, with solemnface--
“I have been to three people with no success.”
Then they remained sitting face to face at the two chimney corners,motionless, in silence. Emma shrugged her shoulders as she stamped herfeet. He heard her murmuring--
“If I were in your place _I_ should soon get some.”
“But where?”
“At your office.” And she looked at him.
An infernal boldness looked out from her burning eyes, and their lidsdrew close together with a lascivious and encouraging look, so that theyoung man felt himself growing weak beneath the mute will of this womanwho was urging him to a crime. Then he was afraid, and to avoid anyexplanation he smote his forehead, crying--
“Morel is to come back to-night; he will not refuse me, I hope” (thiswas one of his friends, the son of a very rich merchant); “and I willbring it you to-morrow,” he added.
Emma did not seem to welcome this hope with all the joy he had expected.Did she suspect the lie? He went on, blushing--
“However, if you don’t see me by three o’clock do not wait for me, mydarling. I must be off now; forgive me! Goodbye!”
He pressed her hand, but it felt quite lifeless. Emma had no strengthleft for any sentiment.
Four o’clock struck, and she rose to return to Yonville, mechanicallyobeying the force of old habits.
The weather was fine. It was one of those March days, clear and sharp,when the sun shines in a perfectly white sky. The Rouen folk, inSunday-clothes, were walking about with happy looks. She reached thePlace du Parvis. People were coming out after vespers; the crowd flowedout through the three doors like a stream through the three arches ofa bridge, and in the middle one, more motionless than a rock, stood thebeadle.
Then she remembered the day when, all anxious and full of hope, she hadentered beneath this large nave, that had opened out before her, lessprofound than her love; and she walked on weeping beneath her veil,giddy, staggering, almost fainting.
“Take care!” cried a voice issuing from the gate of a courtyard that wasthrown open.
She stopped to let pass a black horse, pawing the ground between theshafts of a tilbury, driven by a gentleman in sable furs. Who was it?She knew him. The carriage darted by and disappeared.
Why, it was he--the Viscount. She turned away; the street was empty. Shewas so overwhelmed, so sad, that she had to lean against a wall to keepherself from falling.
Then she thought she had been mistaken. Anyhow, she did not know. Allwithin her and around her was abandoning her. She felt lost, sinkingat random into indefinable abysses, and it was almost with joy that, onreaching the “Croix-Rouge,” she saw the good Homais, who was watchinga large box full of pharmaceutical stores being hoisted on to the“Hirondelle.” In his hand he held tied in a silk handkerchief sixcheminots for his wife.
Madame Homais was very fond of these small, heavy turban-shaped loaves,that are eaten in Lent with salt butter; a last vestige of Gothic foodthat goes back, perhaps, to the time of the Crusades, and with whichthe robust Normans gorged themselves of yore, fancying they saw on thetable, in the light of the yellow torches, between tankards of hippocrasand huge boars’ heads, the heads of Saracens to be devoured. Thedruggist’s wife crunched them up as they had done--heroically, despiteher wretched teeth. And so whenever Homais journeyed to town, he neverfailed to bring her home some that he bought at the great baker’s in theRue Massacre.
“Charmed to see you,” he said, offering Emma a hand to help her into the“Hirondelle.” Then he hung up his cheminots to the cords of the netting,and remained bare-headed in an attitude pensive and Napoleonic.
But when the blind man appeared as usual at the foot of the hill heexclaimed--
“I can’t understand why the authorities tolerate such culpableindustries. Such unfortunates should be locked up and forced to work.Progress, my word! creeps at a snail’s pace. We are floundering about inmere barbarism.”
The blind man held out his hat, that flapped about at the door, as if itwere a bag in the lining that had come unnailed.
“This,” said the chemist, “is a scrofulous affection.”
And though he knew the poor devil, he pretended to see him for the firsttime, murmured something about “cornea,” “opaque cornea,” “sclerotic,” “facies,” then asked him in a paternal tone--
“My friend, have you long had this terrible infirmity? Instead ofgetting drunk at the public, you’d do better to die yourself.”
He advised him to take good wine, good beer, and good joints. The blindman went on with his song; he seemed, moreover, almost idiotic. At lastMonsieur Homais opened his purse--
“Now there’s a sou; give me back two lairds, and don’t forget my advice:you’ll be the better for it.”
Hivert openly cast some doubt on the efficacy of it. But the druggistsaid that he would cure himself with an antiphlogistic pomade of his owncomposition, and he gave his address--“Monsieur Homais, near the market,pretty well known.”
“Now,” said Hivert, “for all this trouble you’ll give us yourperformance.”
The blind man sank down on his haunches, with his head thrown back,whilst he rolled his greenish eyes, lolled out his tongue, and rubbedhis stomach with both hands as he uttered a kind of hollow yell like afamished dog. Emma, filled with disgust, threw him over her shouldera five-franc piece. It was all her fortune. It seemed to her very finethus to throw it away.
The coach had gone on again when suddenly Monsieur Homais leant outthrough the window, crying--
“No farinaceous or milk food, wear wool next the skin, and expose thediseased parts to the smoke of juniper berries.”
The sight of the well-known objects that defiled before her eyesgradually diverted Emma from her present trouble. An intolerable fatigueoverwhelmed her, and she reached her home stupefied, discouraged, almostasleep.
“Come what may come!” she said to herself. “And then, who knows? Why, atany moment could not some extraordinary event occur? Lheureux even mightdie!”
At nine o’clock in the morning she was awakened by the sound of voicesin the Place. There was a crowd round the market reading a large billfixed to one of the posts, and she saw Justin, who was climbing on toa stone and tearing down the bill. But at this moment the rural guardseized him by the collar. Monsieur Homais came out of his shop, and MereLefrangois, in the midst of the crowd, seemed to be perorating.
“Madame! madame!” cried Félicité, running in, “it’s abominable!”
And the poor girl, deeply moved, handed her a yellow paper that she hadjust torn off the door. Emma read with a glance that all her furniturewas for sale.
Then they looked at one another silently. The servant and mistress hadno secret one from the other. At last Félicité sighed--
“If I were you, madame, I should go to Monsieur Guillaumin.”
“Do you think--”
And this question meant to say--
“You who know the house through the servant, has the master spokensometimes of me?”
“Yes, you’d do well to go there.”
She dressed, put on her black gown, and her hood with jet beads, andthat she might not be seen (there was still a crowd on the Place), shetook the path by the river, outside the village.
She reached the notary’s gate quite breathless. The sky was sombre, anda little snow was falling. At the sound of the bell, Theodore in ared waistcoat appeared on the steps; he came to open the door almostfamiliarly, as to an acquaintance, and showed her into the dining-room.
A large porcelain stove crackled beneath a cactus that filled up theniche in the wall, and in black wood frames against the oak-stainedpaper hung Steuben’s “Esmeralda” and Schopin’s “Potiphar.” Theready-laid table, the two silver chafing-dishes, the crystal door-knobs,the parquet and the furniture, all shone with a scrupulous, Englishcleanliness; the windows were ornamented at each corner with stainedglass.
“Now this,” thought Emma, “is the dining-room I ought to have.”
The notary came in pressing his palm-leaf dressing-gown to his breastwith his left arm, while with the other hand he raised and quickly puton again his brown velvet cap, pretentiously cocked on the right side,whence looked out the ends of three fair curls drawn from the back ofthe head, following the line of his bald skull.
After he had offered her a seat he sat down to breakfast, apologisingprofusely for his rudeness.
“I have come,” she said, “to beg you, sir--”
“What, madame? I am listening.”
And she began explaining her position to him. Monsieur Guillaumin knewit, being secretly associated with the linendraper, from whom he alwaysgot capital for the loans on mortgages that he was asked to make.
So he knew (and better than she herself) the long story of the bills,small at first, bearing different names as endorsers, made out at longdates, and constantly renewed up to the day, when, gathering togetherall the protested bills, the shopkeeper had bidden his friend Vincarttake in his own name all the necessary proceedings, not wishing to passfor a tiger with his fellow-citizens.
She mingled her story with recriminations against Lheureux, to which thenotary replied from time to time with some insignificant word. Eatinghis cutlet and drinking his tea, he buried his chin in his sky-bluecravat, into which were thrust two diamond pins, held together by asmall gold chain; and he smiled a singular smile, in a sugary, ambiguousfashion. But noticing that her feet were damp, he said--
“Do get closer to the stove; put your feet up against the porcelain.”
She was afraid of dirtying it. The notary replied in a gallant tone--
“Beautiful things spoil nothing.”
Then she tried to move him, and, growing moved herself, she begantelling him about the poorness of her home, her worries, her wants.He could understand that; an elegant woman! and, without leaving offeating, he had turned completely round towards her, so that his kneebrushed against her boot, whose sole curled round as it smoked againstthe stove.
But when she asked for a thousand sous, he closed his lips, and declaredhe was very sorry he had not had the management of her fortune before,for there were hundreds of ways very convenient, even for a lady, ofturning her money to account. They might, either in the turf-peatsof Grumesnil or building-ground at Havre, almost without risk, haveventured on some excellent speculations; and he let her consume herselfwith rage at the thought of the fabulous sums that she would certainlyhave made.
“How was it,” he went on, “that you didn’t come to me?”
“I hardly know,” she said.
“Why, hey? Did I frighten you so much? It is I, on the contrary, whoought to complain. We hardly know one another; yet I am very devoted toyou. You do not doubt that, I hope?”
He held out his hand, took hers, covered it with a greedy kiss, thenheld it on his knee; and he played delicately with her fingers whilsthe murmured a thousand blandishments. His insipid voice murmured like arunning brook; a light shone in his eyes through the glimmering of hisspectacles, and his hand was advancing up Emma’s sleeve to press herarm. She felt against her cheek his panting breath. This man oppressedher horribly.
She sprang up and said to him--
“Sir, I am waiting.”
“For what?” said the notary, who suddenly became very pale.
“This money.”
“But--” Then, yielding to the outburst of too powerful a desire, “Well,yes!”
He dragged himself towards her on his knees, regardless of hisdressing-gown.
“For pity’s sake, stay. I love you!”
He seized her by her waist. Madame Bovary’s face flushed purple. Sherecoiled with a terrible look, crying--
“You are taking a shameless advantage of my distress, sir! I am to bepitied--not to be sold.”
And she went out.
The notary remained quite stupefied, his eyes fixed on his fineembroidered slippers. They were a love gift, and the sight of them atlast consoled him. Besides, he reflected that such an adventure mighthave carried him too far.
“What a wretch! what a scoundrel! what an infamy!” she said to herself,as she fled with nervous steps beneath the aspens of the path. Thedisappointment of her failure increased the indignation of her outragedmodesty; it seemed to her that Providence pursued her implacably, and,strengthening herself in her pride, she had never felt so much esteemfor herself nor so much contempt for others. A spirit of warfaretransformed her. She would have liked to strike all men, to spit intheir faces, to crush them, and she walked rapidly straight on, pale,quivering, maddened, searching the empty horizon with tear-dimmed eyes,and as it were rejoicing in the hate that was choking her.
When she saw her house a numbness came over her. She could not go on;and yet she must. Besides, whither could she flee?
Félicité was waiting for her at the door. “Well?”
“No!” said Emma.
And for a quarter of an hour the two of them went over the variouspersons in Yonville who might perhaps be inclined to help her. But eachtime that Félicité named someone Emma replied--
“Impossible! they will not!”
“And the master’ll soon be in.”
“I know that well enough. Leave me alone.”
She had tried everything; there was nothing more to be done now; andwhen Charles came in she would have to say to him--
“Go away! This carpet on which you are walking is no longer ours. Inyour own house you do not possess a chair, a pin, a straw, and it is I,poor man, who have ruined you.”
Then there would be a great sob; next he would weep abundantly, and atlast, the surprise past, he would forgive her.
“Yes,” she murmured, grinding her teeth, “he will forgive me, he whowould give a million if I would forgive him for having known me! Never!never!”
This thought of Bovary’s superiority to her exasperated her. Then,whether she confessed or did not confess, presently, immediately,to-morrow, he would know the catastrophe all the same; so she must waitfor this horrible scene, and bear the weight of his magnanimity. Thedesire to return to Lheureux’s seized her--what would be the use? Towrite to her father--it was too late; and perhaps, she began to repentnow that she had not yielded to that other, when she heard the trot ofa horse in the alley. It was he; he was opening the gate; he was whiterthan the plaster wall. Rushing to the stairs, she ran out quickly to thesquare; and the wife of the mayor, who was talking to Lestiboudois infront of the church, saw her go in to the tax-collector’s.
She hurried off to tell Madame Caron, and the two ladies went up tothe attic, and, hidden by some linen spread across props, stationedthemselves comfortably for overlooking the whole of Binet’s room.
He was alone in his garret, busy imitating in wood one of thoseindescribable bits of ivory, composed of crescents, of spheres hollowedout one within the other, the whole as straight as an obelisk, and of nouse whatever; and he was beginning on the last piece--he was nearing hisgoal. In the twilight of the workshop the white dust was flying from histools like a shower of sparks under the hoofs of a galloping horse; thetwo wheels were turning, droning; Binet smiled, his chin lowered, hisnostrils distended, and, in a word, seemed lost in one of those completehappinesses that, no doubt, belong only to commonplace occupations,which amuse the mind with facile difficulties, and satisfy by arealisation of that beyond which such minds have not a dream.
“Ah! there she is!” exclaimed Madame Tuvache.
But it was impossible because of the lathe to hear what she was saying.
At last these ladies thought they made out the word “francs,” and MadameTuvache whispered in a low voice--
“She is begging him to give her time for paying her taxes.”
“Apparently!” replied the other.
They saw her walking up and down, examining the napkin-rings, thecandlesticks, the banister rails against the walls, while Binet strokedhis beard with satisfaction.
“Do you think she wants to order something of him?” said Madame Tuvache.
“Why, he doesn’t sell anything,” objected her neighbour.
The tax-collector seemed to be listening with wide-open eyes, as if hedid not understand. She went on in a tender, suppliant manner. She camenearer to him, her breast heaving; they no longer spoke.
“Is she making him advances?” said Madame Tuvache. Binet was scarlet tohis very ears. She took hold of his hands.
“Oh, it’s too much!”
And no doubt she was suggesting something abominable to him; for thetax-collector--yet he was brave, had fought at Bautzen and at Lutzen,had been through the French campaign, and had even been recommended forthe cross--suddenly, as at the sight of a serpent, recoiled as far as hecould from her, crying--
“Madame! what do you mean?”
“Women like that ought to be whipped,” said Madame Tuvache.
“But where is she?” continued Madame Caron, for she had disappearedwhilst they spoke; then catching sight of her going up the Grande Rue,and turning to the right as if making for the cemetery, they were lostin conjectures.
“Nurse Rollet,” she said on reaching the nurse’s, “I am choking; unlaceme!” She fell on the bed sobbing. Nurse Rollet covered her with apetticoat and remained standing by her side. Then, as she did notanswer, the good woman withdrew, took her wheel and began spinning flax.
“Oh, leave off!” she murmured, fancying she heard Binet’s lathe.
“What’s bothering her?” said the nurse to herself. “Why has she comehere?”
She had rushed thither; impelled by a kind of horror that drove her fromher home.
Lying on her back, motionless, and with staring eyes, she saw things butvaguely, although she tried to with idiotic persistence. She lookedat the scales on the walls, two brands smoking end to end, and a longspider crawling over her head in a rent in the beam. At last she beganto collect her thoughts. She remembered--one day--Léon--Oh! how longago that was--the sun was shining on the river, and the clematis wereperfuming the air. Then, carried away as by a rushing torrent, she soonbegan to recall the day before.
“What time is it?” she asked.
Mere Rollet went out, raised the fingers of her right hand to that sideof the sky that was brightest, and came back slowly, saying--
“Nearly three.”
“Ah! thanks, thanks!”
For he would come; he would have found some money. But he would,perhaps, go down yonder, not guessing she was here, and she told thenurse to run to her house to fetch him.
“Be quick!”
“But, my dear lady, I’m going, I’m going!”
She wondered now that she had not thought of him from the first.Yesterday he had given his word; he would not break it. And she alreadysaw herself at Lheureux’s spreading out her three bank-notes on hisbureau. Then she would have to invent some story to explain matters toBovary. What should it be?
The nurse, however, was a long while gone. But, as there was no clockin the cot, Emma feared she was perhaps exaggerating the length of time.She began walking round the garden, step by step; she went into the pathby the hedge, and returned quickly, hoping that the woman would havecome back by another road. At last, weary of waiting, assailed by fearsthat she thrust from her, no longer conscious whether she had been herea century or a moment, she sat down in a corner, closed her eyes, andstopped her ears. The gate grated; she sprang up. Before she had spokenMere Rollet said to her--
“There is no one at your house!”
“What?”
“Oh, no one! And the doctor is crying. He is calling for you; they’relooking for you.”
Emma answered nothing. She gasped as she turned her eyes abouther, while the peasant woman, frightened at her face, drew backinstinctively, thinking her mad. Suddenly she struck her brow anduttered a cry; for the thought of Rodolphe, like a flash of lightning ina dark night, had passed into her soul. He was so good, so delicate, sogenerous! And besides, should he hesitate to do her this service, shewould know well enough how to constrain him to it by re-waking, in asingle moment, their lost love. So she set out towards La Huchette, notseeing that she was hastening to offer herself to that which but a whileago had so angered her, not in the least conscious of her prostitution.
Chapter Eight
She asked herself as she walked along, “What am I going to say? Howshall I begin?” And as she went on she recognised the thickets,the trees, the sea-rushes on the hill, the château yonder. All thesensations of her first tenderness came back to her, and her poor achingheart opened out amorously. A warm wind blew in her face; the meltingsnow fell drop by drop from the buds to the grass.
She entered, as she used to, through the small park-gate. She reachedthe avenue bordered by a double row of dense lime-trees. They wereswaying their long whispering branches to and fro. The dogs in theirkennels all barked, and the noise of their voices resounded, but broughtout no one.
She went up the large straight staircase with wooden balusters that ledto the corridor paved with dusty flags, into which several doors in arow opened, as in a monastery or an inn. His was at the top, rightat the end, on the left. When she placed her fingers on the lock herstrength suddenly deserted her. She was afraid, almost wished hewould not be there, though this was her only hope, her last chance ofsalvation. She collected her thoughts for one moment, and, strengtheningherself by the feeling of present necessity, went in.
He was in front of the fire, both his feet on the mantelpiece, smoking apipe.
“What! it is you!” he said, getting up hurriedly.
“Yes, it is I, Rodolphe. I should like to ask your advice.”
And, despite all her efforts, it was impossible for her to open herlips.
“You have not changed; you are charming as ever!”
“Oh,” she replied bitterly, “they are poor charms since you disdainedthem.”
Then he began a long explanation of his conduct, excusing himself invague terms, in default of being able to invent better.
She yielded to his words, still more to his voice and the sight of him,so that, she pretended to believe, or perhaps believed; in the pretexthe gave for their rupture; this was a secret on which depended thehonour, the very life of a third person.
“No matter!” she said, looking at him sadly. “I have suffered much.”
He replied philosophically--
“Such is life!”
“Has life,” Emma went on, “been good to you at least, since ourseparation?”
“Oh, neither good nor bad.”
“Perhaps it would have been better never to have parted.”
“Yes, perhaps.”
“You think so?” she said, drawing nearer, and she sighed. “Oh, Rodolphe!if you but knew! I loved you so!”
It was then that she took his hand, and they remained some time, theirfingers intertwined, like that first day at the Show. With a gesture ofpride he struggled against this emotion. But sinking upon his breast shesaid to him--
“How did you think I could live without you? One cannot lose the habitof happiness. I was desolate. I thought I should die. I will tell youabout all that and you will see. And you--you fled from me!”
For, all the three years, he had carefully avoided her in consequenceof that natural cowardice that characterises the stronger sex. Emma wenton, with dainty little nods, more coaxing than an amorous kitten--
“You love others, confess it! Oh, I understand them, dear! I excusethem. You probably seduced them as you seduced me. You are indeed a man;you have everything to make one love you. But we’ll begin again, won’twe? We will love one another. See! I am laughing; I am happy! Oh,speak!”
And she was charming to see, with her eyes, in which trembled a tear,like the rain of a storm in a blue corolla.
He had drawn her upon his knees, and with the back of his hand wascaressing her smooth hair, where in the twilight was mirrored like agolden arrow one last ray of the sun. She bent down her brow; at last hekissed her on the eyelids quite gently with the tips of his lips.
“Why, you have been crying! What for?”
She burst into tears. Rodolphe thought this was an outburst of herlove. As she did not speak, he took this silence for a last remnant ofresistance, and then he cried out--
“Oh, forgive me! You are the only one who pleases me. I was imbecile andcruel. I love you. I will love you always. What is it. Tell me!” He waskneeling by her.
“Well, I am ruined, Rodolphe! You must lend me three thousand francs.”
“But--but--” said he, getting up slowly, while his face assumed a graveexpression.
“You know,” she went on quickly, “that my husband had placed his wholefortune at a notary’s. He ran away. So we borrowed; the patients don’tpay us. Moreover, the settling of the estate is not yet done; we shallhave the money later on. But to-day, for want of three thousand francs,we are to be sold up. It is to be at once, this very moment, and,counting upon your friendship, I have come to you.”
“Ah!” thought Rodolphe, turning very pale, “that was what she came for.” At last he said with a calm air--
“Dear madame, I have not got them.”
He did not lie. If he had had them, he would, no doubt, have given them,although it is generally disagreeable to do such fine things: a demandfor money being, of all the winds that blow upon love, the coldest andmost destructive.
First she looked at him for some moments.
“You have not got them!” she repeated several times. “You have not gotthem! I ought to have spared myself this last shame. You never loved me.You are no better than the others.”
She was betraying, ruining herself.
Rodolphe interrupted her, declaring he was “hard up” himself.
“Ah! I pity you,” said Emma. “Yes--very much.”
And fixing her eyes upon an embossed carabine, that shone against itspanoply, “But when one is so poor one doesn’t have silver on the butt ofone’s gun. One doesn’t buy a clock inlaid with tortoise shell,” she wenton, pointing to a buhl timepiece, “nor silver-gilt whistles for one’swhips,” and she touched them, “nor charms for one’s watch. Oh, he wantsfor nothing! even to a liqueur-stand in his room! For you love yourself;you live well. You have a château, farms, woods; you go hunting; youtravel to Paris. Why, if it were but that,” she cried, taking up twostuds from the mantelpiece, “but the least of these trifles, one can getmoney for them. Oh, I do not want them, keep them!”
And she threw the two links away from her, their gold chain breaking asit struck against the wall.
“But I! I would have given you everything. I would have sold all, workedfor you with my hands, I would have begged on the highroads for a smile,for a look, to hear you say ‘Thanks!’ And you sit there quietly in yourarm-chair, as if you had not made me suffer enough already! But for you,and you know it, I might have lived happily. What made you do it? Wasit a bet? Yet you loved me--you said so. And but a moment since--Ah!it would have been better to have driven me away. My hands are hot withyour kisses, and there is the spot on the carpet where at my knees youswore an eternity of love! You made me believe you; for two years youheld me in the most magnificent, the sweetest dream! Eh! Our plans forthe journey, do you remember? Oh, your letter! your letter! it tore myheart! And then when I come back to him--to him, rich, happy, free--toimplore the help the first stranger would give, a suppliant, andbringing back to him all my tenderness, he repulses me because it wouldcost him three thousand francs!”
“I haven’t got them,” replied Rodolphe, with that perfect calm withwhich resigned rage covers itself as with a shield.
She went out. The walls trembled, the ceiling was crushing her, and shepassed back through the long alley, stumbling against the heaps of deadleaves scattered by the wind. At last she reached the ha-ha hedge infront of the gate; she broke her nails against the lock in her haste toopen it. Then a hundred steps farther on, breathless, almost falling,she stopped. And now turning round, she once more saw the impassivechâteau, with the park, the gardens, the three courts, and all thewindows of the facade.
She remained lost in stupor, and having no more consciousness of herselfthan through the beating of her arteries, that she seemed to hearbursting forth like a deafening music filling all the fields. The earthbeneath her feet was more yielding than the sea, and the furrows seemedto her immense brown waves breaking into foam. Everything in herhead, of memories, ideas, went off at once like a thousand pieces offireworks. She saw her father, Lheureux’s closet, their room at home,another landscape. Madness was coming upon her; she grew afraid, andmanaged to recover herself, in a confused way, it is true, for she didnot in the least remember the cause of the terrible condition she wasin, that is to say, the question of money. She suffered only in herlove, and felt her soul passing from her in this memory; as wounded men,dying, feel their life ebb from their bleeding wounds.
Night was falling, crows were flying about.
Suddenly it seemed to her that fiery spheres were exploding in the airlike fulminating balls when they strike, and were whirling, whirling,to melt at last upon the snow between the branches of the trees. In themidst of each of them appeared the face of Rodolphe. They multiplied anddrew near her, penetrating, her. It all disappeared; she recognised thelights of the houses that shone through the fog.
Now her situation, like an abyss, rose up before her. She was panting asif her heart would burst. Then in an ecstasy of heroism, that madeher almost joyous, she ran down the hill, crossed the cow-plank, thefoot-path, the alley, the market, and reached the chemist’s shop. Shewas about to enter, but at the sound of the bell someone might come, andslipping in by the gate, holding her breath, feeling her way along thewalls, she went as far as the door of the kitchen, where a candle stuckon the stove was burning. Justin in his shirt-sleeves was carrying out adish.
“Ah! they are dining; I will wait.”
He returned; she tapped at the window. He went out.
“The key! the one for upstairs where he keeps the--”
“What?”
And he looked at her, astonished at the pallor of her face, that stoodout white against the black background of the night. She seemed tohim extraordinarily beautiful and majestic as a phantom. Withoutunderstanding what she wanted, he had the presentiment of somethingterrible.
But she went on quickly in a love voice; in a sweet, melting voice, “Iwant it; give it to me.”
As the partition wall was thin, they could hear the clatter of the forkson the plates in the dining-room.
She pretended that she wanted to kill the rats that kept her fromsleeping.
“I must tell master.”
“No, stay!” Then with an indifferent air, “Oh, it’s not worth while;I’ll tell him presently. Come, light me upstairs.”
She entered the corridor into which the laboratory door opened. Againstthe wall was a key labelled Capharnaum.
“Justin!” called the druggist impatiently.
“Let us go up.”
And he followed her. The key turned in the lock, and she went straightto the third shelf, so well did her memory guide her, seized the bluejar, tore out the cork, plunged in her hand, and withdrawing it full ofa white powder, she began eating it.
“Stop!” he cried, rushing at her.
“Hush! someone will come.”
He was in despair, was calling out.
“Say nothing, or all the blame will fall on your master.”
Then she went home, suddenly calmed, and with something of the serenityof one that had performed a duty.
When Charles, distracted by the news of the distraint, returned home,Emma had just gone out. He cried aloud, wept, fainted, but she did notreturn. Where could she be? He sent Félicité to Homais, to MonsieurTuvache, to Lheureux, to the “Lion d’Or,” everywhere, and in theintervals of his agony he saw his reputation destroyed, their fortunelost, Berthe’s future ruined. By what?--Not a word! He waited till sixin the evening. At last, unable to bear it any longer, and fancying shehad gone to Rouen, he set out along the highroad, walked a mile, met noone, again waited, and returned home. She had come back.
“What was the matter? Why? Explain to me.”
She sat down at her writing-table and wrote a letter, which she sealedslowly, adding the date and the hour. Then she said in a solemn tone:
“You are to read it to-morrow; till then, I pray you, do not ask me asingle question. No, not one!”
“But--”
“Oh, leave me!”
She lay down full length on her bed. A bitter taste that she felt in hermouth awakened her. She saw Charles, and again closed her eyes.
She was studying herself curiously, to see if she were not suffering.But no! nothing as yet. She heard the ticking of the clock, thecrackling of the fire, and Charles breathing as he stood upright by herbed.
“Ah! it is but a little thing, death!” she thought. “I shall fall asleepand all will be over.”
She drank a mouthful of water and turned to the wall. The frightfultaste of ink continued.
“I am thirsty; oh! so thirsty,” she sighed.
“What is it?” said Charles, who was handing her a glass.
“It is nothing! Open the window; I am choking.”
She was seized with a sickness so sudden that she had hardly time todraw out her handkerchief from under the pillow.
“Take it away,” she said quickly; “throw it away.”
He spoke to her; she did not answer. She lay motionless, afraid thatthe slightest movement might make her vomit. But she felt an icy coldcreeping from her feet to her heart.
“Ah! it is beginning,” she murmured.
“What did you say?”
She turned her head from side to side with a gentle movement full ofagony, while constantly opening her mouth as if something very heavywere weighing upon her tongue. At eight o’clock the vomiting beganagain.
Charles noticed that at the bottom of the basin there was a sort ofwhite sediment sticking to the sides of the porcelain.
“This is extraordinary--very singular,” he repeated.
But she said in a firm voice, “No, you are mistaken.”
Then gently, and almost as caressing her, he passed his hand over herstomach. She uttered a sharp cry. He fell back terror-stricken.
Then she began to groan, faintly at first. Her shoulders were shaken bya strong shuddering, and she was growing paler than the sheets in whichher clenched fingers buried themselves. Her unequal pulse was now almostimperceptible.
Drops of sweat oozed from her bluish face, that seemed as if rigid inthe exhalations of a metallic vapour. Her teeth chattered, her dilatedeyes looked vaguely about her, and to all questions she replied onlywith a shake of the head; she even smiled once or twice. Gradually, hermoaning grew louder; a hollow shriek burst from her; she pretended shewas better and that she would get up presently. But she was seized withconvulsions and cried out--
“Ah! my God! It is horrible!”
He threw himself on his knees by her bed.
“Tell me! what have you eaten? Answer, for heaven’s sake!”
And he looked at her with a tenderness in his eyes such as she had neverseen.
“Well, there--there!” she said in a faint voice. He flew to thewriting-table, tore open the seal, and read aloud: “Accuse no one.” Hestopped, passed his hands across his eyes, and read it over again.
“What! help--help!”
He could only keep repeating the word: “Poisoned! poisoned!” Félicitéran to Homais, who proclaimed it in the market-place; Madame Lefrancoisheard it at the “Lion d’Or”; some got up to go and tell theirneighbours, and all night the village was on the alert.
Distraught, faltering, reeling, Charles wandered about the room. Heknocked against the furniture, tore his hair, and the chemist had neverbelieved that there could be so terrible a sight.
He went home to write to Monsieur Canivet and to Doctor Lariviere. Helost his head, and made more than fifteen rough copies. Hippolyte wentto Neufchâtel, and Justin so spurred Bovary’s horse that he left itfoundered and three parts dead by the hill at Bois-Guillaume.
Charles tried to look up his medical dictionary, but could not read it;the lines were dancing.
“Be calm,” said the druggist; “we have only to administer a powerfulantidote. What is the poison?”
Charles showed him the letter. It was arsenic.
“Very well,” said Homais, “we must make an analysis.”
For he knew that in cases of poisoning an analysis must be made; and theother, who did not understand, answered--
“Oh, do anything! save her!”
Then going back to her, he sank upon the carpet, and lay there with hishead leaning against the edge of her bed, sobbing.
“Don’t cry,” she said to him. “Soon I shall not trouble you any more.”
“Why was it? Who drove you to it?”
She replied. “It had to be, my dear!”
“Weren’t you happy? Is it my fault? I did all I could!”
“Yes, that is true--you are good--you.”
And she passed her hand slowly over his hair. The sweetness of thissensation deepened his sadness; he felt his whole being dissolvingin despair at the thought that he must lose her, just when she wasconfessing more love for him than ever. And he could think of nothing;he did not know, he did not dare; the urgent need for some immediateresolution gave the finishing stroke to the turmoil of his mind.
So she had done, she thought, with all the treachery; and meanness,and numberless desires that had tortured her. She hated no one now; atwilight dimness was settling upon her thoughts, and, of all earthlynoises, Emma heard none but the intermittent lamentations of this poorheart, sweet and indistinct like the echo of a symphony dying away.
“Bring me the child,” she said, raising herself on her elbow.
“You are not worse, are you?” asked Charles.
“No, no!”
The child, serious, and still half-asleep, was carried in on theservant’s arm in her long white nightgown, from which her barefeet peeped out. She looked wonderingly at the disordered room, andhalf-closed her eyes, dazzled by the candles burning on the table. Theyreminded her, no doubt, of the morning of New Year’s day and Mid-Lent,when thus awakened early by candle-light she came to her mother’s bed tofetch her presents, for she began saying--
“But where is it, mamma?” And as everybody was silent, “But I can’t seemy little stocking.”
Félicité held her over the bed while she still kept looking towards themantelpiece.
“Has nurse taken it?” she asked.
And at this name, that carried her back to the memory of her adulteriesand her calamities, Madame Bovary turned away her head, as at theloathing of another bitterer poison that rose to her mouth. But Bertheremained perched on the bed.
“Oh, how big your eyes are, mamma! How pale you are! how hot you are!”
Her mother looked at her. “I am frightened!” cried the child, recoiling.
Emma took her hand to kiss it; the child struggled.
“That will do. Take her away,” cried Charles, who was sobbing in thealcove.
Then the symptoms ceased for a moment; she seemed less agitated; and atevery insignificant word, at every respiration a little more easy, heregained hope. At last, when Canivet came in, he threw himself into hisarms.
“Ah! it is you. Thanks! You are good! But she is better. See! look ather.”
His colleague was by no means of this opinion, and, as he said ofhimself, “never beating about the bush,” he prescribed, an emetic inorder to empty the stomach completely.
She soon began vomiting blood. Her lips became drawn. Her limbs wereconvulsed, her whole body covered with brown spots, and her pulseslipped beneath the fingers like a stretched thread, like a harp-stringnearly breaking.
After this she began to scream horribly. She cursed the poison, railedat it, and implored it to be quick, and thrust away with her stiffenedarms everything that Charles, in more agony than herself, tried to makeher drink. He stood up, his handkerchief to his lips, with a rattlingsound in his throat, weeping, and choked by sobs that shook his wholebody. Félicité was running hither and thither in the room. Homais,motionless, uttered great sighs; and Monsieur Canivet, always retaininghis self-command, nevertheless began to feel uneasy.
“The devil! yet she has been purged, and from the moment that the causeceases--”
“The effect must cease,” said Homais, “that is evident.”
“Oh, save her!” cried Bovary.
And, without listening to the chemist, who was still venturing thehypothesis, “It is perhaps a salutary paroxysm,” Canivet was about toadminister some theriac, when they heard the cracking of a whip; all thewindows rattled, and a post-chaise drawn by three horses abreast, up totheir ears in mud, drove at a gallop round the corner of the market. Itwas Doctor Lariviere.
The apparition of a god would not have caused more commotion. Bovaryraised his hands; Canivet stopped short; and Homais pulled off hisskull-cap long before the doctor had come in.
He belonged to that great school of surgery begotten of Bichat, to thatgeneration, now extinct, of philosophical practitioners, who, lovingtheir art with a fanatical love, exercised it with enthusiasm andwisdom. Everyone in his hospital trembled when he was angry; and hisstudents so revered him that they tried, as soon as they were themselvesin practice, to imitate him as much as possible. So that in all thetowns about they were found wearing his long wadded merino overcoatand black frock-coat, whose buttoned cuffs slightly covered his brawnyhands--very beautiful hands, and that never knew gloves, as though to bemore ready to plunge into suffering. Disdainful of honours, of titles,and of academies, like one of the old Knight-Hospitallers, generous,fatherly to the poor, and practising virtue without believing in it, hewould almost have passed for a saint if the keenness of his intellecthad not caused him to be feared as a demon. His glance, more penetratingthan his bistouries, looked straight into your soul, and dissected everylie athwart all assertions and all reticences. And thus he went along,full of that debonair majesty that is given by the consciousnessof great talent, of fortune, and of forty years of a labourious andirreproachable life.
He frowned as soon as he had passed the door when he saw the cadaverousface of Emma stretched out on her back with her mouth open. Then, whileapparently listening to Canivet, he rubbed his fingers up and downbeneath his nostrils, and repeated--
“Good! good!”
But he made a slow gesture with his shoulders. Bovary watched him; theylooked at one another; and this man, accustomed as he was to the sightof pain, could not keep back a tear that fell on his shirt-frill.
He tried to take Canivet into the next room. Charles followed him.
“She is very ill, isn’t she? If we put on sinapisms? Anything! Oh, thinkof something, you who have saved so many!”
Charles caught him in both his arms, and gazed at him wildly,imploringly, half-fainting against his breast.
“Come, my poor fellow, courage! There is nothing more to be done.”
And Doctor Lariviere turned away.
“You are going?”
“I will come back.”
He went out only to give an order to the coachman, with MonsieurCanivet, who did not care either to have Emma die under his hands.
The chemist rejoined them on the Place. He could not by temperament keepaway from celebrities, so he begged Monsieur Lariviere to do him thesignal honour of accepting some breakfast.
He sent quickly to the “Lion d’Or” for some pigeons; to the butcher’sfor all the cutlets that were to be had; to Tuvache for cream; andto Lestiboudois for eggs; and the druggist himself aided in thepreparations, while Madame Homais was saying as she pulled together thestrings of her jacket--
“You must excuse us, sir, for in this poor place, when one hasn’t beentold the night before--”
“Wine glasses!” whispered Homais.
“If only we were in town, we could fall back upon stuffed trotters.”
“Be quiet! Sit down, doctor!”
He thought fit, after the first few mouthfuls, to give some details asto the catastrophe.
“We first had a feeling of siccity in the pharynx, then intolerablepains at the epigastrium, super purgation, coma.”
“But how did she poison herself?”
“I don’t know, doctor, and I don’t even know where she can have procuredthe arsenious acid.”
Justin, who was just bringing in a pile of plates, began to tremble.
“What’s the matter?” said the chemist.
At this question the young man dropped the whole lot on the ground witha crash.
“Imbecile!” cried Homais, “awkward lout! block-head! confounded ass!”
But suddenly controlling himself--
“I wished, doctor, to make an analysis, and primo I delicatelyintroduced a tube--”
“You would have done better,” said the physician, “to introduce yourfingers into her throat.”
His colleague was silent, having just before privately received a severelecture about his emetic, so that this good Canivet, so arrogant and soverbose at the time of the clubfoot, was to-day very modest. He smiledwithout ceasing in an approving manner.
Homais dilated in Amphytrionic pride, and the affecting thought ofBovary vaguely contributed to his pleasure by a kind of egotisticreflex upon himself. Then the presence of the doctor transported him.He displayed his erudition, cited pell-mell cantharides, upas, themanchineel, vipers.
“I have even read that various persons have found themselvesunder toxicological symptoms, and, as it were, thunderstricken byblack-pudding that had been subjected to a too vehement fumigation.At least, this was stated in a very fine report drawn up by one of ourpharmaceutical chiefs, one of our masters, the illustrious Cadet deGassicourt!”
Madame Homais reappeared, carrying one of those shaky machines thatare heated with spirits of wine; for Homais liked to make his coffeeat table, having, moreover, torrefied it, pulverised it, and mixed ithimself.
“Saccharum, doctor?” said he, offering the sugar.
Then he had all his children brought down, anxious to have thephysician’s opinion on their constitutions.
At last Monsieur Lariviere was about to leave, when Madame Homais askedfor a consultation about her husband. He was making his blood too thickby going to sleep every evening after dinner.
“Oh, it isn’t his blood that’s too thick,” said the physician.
And, smiling a little at his unnoticed joke, the doctor opened thedoor. But the chemist’s shop was full of people; he had the greatestdifficulty in getting rid of Monsieur Tuvache, who feared his spousewould get inflammation of the lungs, because she was in the habit ofspitting on the ashes; then of Monsieur Binet, who sometimes experiencedsudden attacks of great hunger; and of Madame Caron, who sufferedfrom tinglings; of Lheureux, who had vertigo; of Lestiboudois, who hadrheumatism; and of Madame Lefrancois, who had heartburn. At last thethree horses started; and it was the general opinion that he had notshown himself at all obliging.
Public attention was distracted by the appearance of MonsieurBournisien, who was going across the market with the holy oil.
Homais, as was due to his principles, compared priests to ravensattracted by the odour of death. The sight of an ecclesiastic waspersonally disagreeable to him, for the cassock made him think of theshroud, and he detested the one from some fear of the other.
Nevertheless, not shrinking from what he called his mission, he returnedto Bovary’s in company with Canivet whom Monsieur Lariviere, beforeleaving, had strongly urged to make this visit; and he would, but forhis wife’s objections, have taken his two sons with him, in orderto accustom them to great occasions; that this might be a lesson, anexample, a solemn picture, that should remain in their heads later on.
The room when they went in was full of mournful solemnity. On thework-table, covered over with a white cloth, there were five or sixsmall balls of cotton in a silver dish, near a large crucifix betweentwo lighted candles.
Emma, her chin sunken upon her breast, had her eyes inordinately wideopen, and her poor hands wandered over the sheets with that hideousand soft movement of the dying, that seems as if they wanted already tocover themselves with the shroud. Pale as a statue and with eyes red asfire, Charles, not weeping, stood opposite her at the foot of the bed,while the priest, bending one knee, was muttering words in a low voice.
She turned her face slowly, and seemed filled with joy on seeingsuddenly the violet stole, no doubt finding again, in the midst ofa temporary lull in her pain, the lost voluptuousness of her firstmystical transports, with the visions of eternal beatitude that werebeginning.
The priest rose to take the crucifix; then she stretched forward herneck as one who is athirst, and glueing her lips to the body of theMan-God, she pressed upon it with all her expiring strength the fullestkiss of love that she had ever given. Then he recited the Misereatur andthe Indulgentiam, dipped his right thumb in the oil, and began to giveextreme unction. First upon the eyes, that had so coveted all worldlypomp; then upon the nostrils, that had been greedy of the warm breezeand amorous odours; then upon the mouth, that had uttered lies, that hadcurled with pride and cried out in lewdness; then upon the hands thathad delighted in sensual touches; and finally upon the soles of thefeet, so swift of yore, when she was running to satisfy her desires, andthat would now walk no more.
The cure wiped his fingers, threw the bit of cotton dipped in oil intothe fire, and came and sat down by the dying woman, to tell her thatshe must now blend her sufferings with those of Jesus Christ and abandonherself to the divine mercy.
Finishing his exhortations, he tried to place in her hand a blessedcandle, symbol of the celestial glory with which she was soon to besurrounded. Emma, too weak, could not close her fingers, and the taper,but for Monsieur Bournisien would have fallen to the ground.
However, she was not quite so pale, and her face had an expression ofserenity as if the sacrament had cured her.
The priest did not fail to point this out; he even explained to Bovarythat the Lord sometimes prolonged the life of persons when he thought itmeet for their salvation; and Charles remembered the day when, so neardeath, she had received the communion. Perhaps there was no need todespair, he thought.
In fact, she looked around her slowly, as one awakening from a dream;then in a distinct voice she asked for her looking-glass, and remainedsome time bending over it, until the big tears fell from her eyes. Thenshe turned away her head with a sigh and fell back upon the pillows.
Her chest soon began panting rapidly; the whole of her tongue protrudedfrom her mouth; her eyes, as they rolled, grew paler, like the twoglobes of a lamp that is going out, so that one might have thoughther already dead but for the fearful labouring of her ribs, shakenby violent breathing, as if the soul were struggling to free itself.Félicité knelt down before the crucifix, and the druggist himselfslightly bent his knees, while Monsieur Canivet looked out vaguely atthe Place. Bournisien had again begun to pray, his face bowed againstthe edge of the bed, his long black cassock trailing behind him in theroom. Charles was on the other side, on his knees, his arms outstretchedtowards Emma. He had taken her hands and pressed them, shuddering atevery beat of her heart, as at the shaking of a falling ruin. As thedeath-rattle became stronger the priest prayed faster; his prayersmingled with the stifled sobs of Bovary, and sometimes all seemed lostin the muffled murmur of the Latin syllables that tolled like a passingbell.
Suddenly on the pavement was heard a loud noise of clogs and theclattering of a stick; and a voice rose--a raucous voice--that sang--
     “Maids in the warmth of a summer day     Dream of love and of love always”
Emma raised herself like a galvanised corpse, her hair undone, her eyesfixed, staring.
     “Where the sickle blades have been,        Nannette, gathering ears of corn,     Passes bending down, my queen,        To the earth where they were born.”
“The blind man!” she cried. And Emma began to laugh, an atrocious,frantic, despairing laugh, thinking she saw the hideous face of the poorwretch that stood out against the eternal night like a menace.
     “The wind is strong this summer day,     Her petticoat has flown away.”
She fell back upon the mattress in a convulsion. They all drew near. Shewas dead.
Chapter Nine
There is always after the death of anyone a kind of stupefaction;so difficult is it to grasp this advent of nothingness and to resignourselves to believe in it. But still, when he saw that she did notmove, Charles threw himself upon her, crying--
“Farewell! farewell!”
Homais and Canivet dragged him from the room.
“Restrain yourself!”
“Yes.” said he, struggling, “I’ll be quiet. I’ll not do anything. Butleave me alone. I want to see her. She is my wife!”
And he wept.
“Cry,” said the chemist; “let nature take her course; that will solaceyou.”
Weaker than a child, Charles let himself be led downstairs into thesitting-room, and Monsieur Homais soon went home. On the Place hewas accosted by the blind man, who, having dragged himself as far asYonville, in the hope of getting the antiphlogistic pomade, was askingevery passer-by where the druggist lived.
“There now! as if I hadn’t got other fish to fry. Well, so much theworse; you must come later on.”
And he entered the shop hurriedly.
He had to write two letters, to prepare a soothing potion for Bovary, toinvent some lie that would conceal the poisoning, and work it up into anarticle for the “Fanal,” without counting the people who were waiting toget the news from him; and when the Yonvillers had all heard his storyof the arsenic that she had mistaken for sugar in making a vanillacream. Homais once more returned to Bovary’s.
He found him alone (Monsieur Canivet had left), sitting in an arm-chairnear the window, staring with an idiotic look at the flags of the floor.
“Now,” said the chemist, “you ought yourself to fix the hour for theceremony.”
“Why? What ceremony?” Then, in a stammering, frightened voice, “Oh, no!not that. No! I want to see her here.”
Homais, to keep himself in countenance, took up a water-bottle on thewhatnot to water the geraniums.
“Ah! thanks,” said Charles; “you are good.”
But he did not finish, choking beneath the crowd of memories that thisaction of the druggist recalled to him.
Then to distract him, Homais thought fit to talk a little horticulture:plants wanted humidity. Charles bowed his head in sign of approbation.
“Besides, the fine days will soon be here again.”
“Ah!” said Bovary.
The druggist, at his wit’s end, began softly to draw aside the smallwindow-curtain.
“Hallo! there’s Monsieur Tuvache passing.”
Charles repeated like a machine---
“Monsieur Tuvache passing!”
Homais did not dare to speak to him again about the funeralarrangements; it was the priest who succeeded in reconciling him tothem.
He shut himself up in his consulting-room, took a pen, and after sobbingfor some time, wrote--
“I wish her to be buried in her wedding-dress, with white shoes, and awreath. Her hair is to be spread out over her shoulders. Three coffins,one of oak, one of mahogany, one of lead. Let no one say anything to me.I shall have strength. Over all there is to be placed a large piece ofgreen velvet. This is my wish; see that it is done.”
The two men were much surprised at Bovary’s romantic ideas. The chemistat once went to him and said--
“This velvet seems to me a superfetation. Besides, the expense--”
“What’s that to you?” cried Charles. “Leave me! You did not love her.Go!”
The priest took him by the arm for a turn in the garden. He discoursedon the vanity of earthly things. God was very great, was very good: onemust submit to his decrees without a murmur; nay, must even thank him.
Charles burst out into blasphemies: “I hate your God!”
“The spirit of rebellion is still upon you,” sighed the ecclesiastic.
Bovary was far away. He was walking with great strides along by thewall, near the espalier, and he ground his teeth; he raised to heavenlooks of malediction, but not so much as a leaf stirred.
A fine rain was falling: Charles, whose chest was bare, at last began toshiver; he went in and sat down in the kitchen.
At six o’clock a noise like a clatter of old iron was heard on thePlace; it was the “Hirondelle” coming in, and he remained with hisforehead against the windowpane, watching all the passengers getout, one after the other. Félicité put down a mattress for him in thedrawing-room. He threw himself upon it and fell asleep.
Although a philosopher, Monsieur Homais respected the dead. So bearingno grudge to poor Charles, he came back again in the evening to sit upwith the body; bringing with him three volumes and a pocket-book fortaking notes.
Monsieur Bournisien was there, and two large candles were burning at thehead of the bed, that had been taken out of the alcove. The druggist, onwhom the silence weighed, was not long before he began formulating someregrets about this “unfortunate young woman.” and the priest repliedthat there was nothing to do now but pray for her.
“Yet,” Homais went on, “one of two things; either she died in a state ofgrace (as the Church has it), and then she has no need of our prayers;or else she departed impertinent (that is, I believe, the ecclesiasticalexpression), and then--”
Bournisien interrupted him, replying testily that it was none the lessnecessary to pray.
“But,” objected the chemist, “since God knows all our needs, what can bethe good of prayer?”
“What!” cried the ecclesiastic, “prayer! Why, aren’t you a Christian?”
“Excuse me,” said Homais; “I admire Christianity. To begin with, itenfranchised the slaves, introduced into the world a morality--”
“That isn’t the question. All the texts-”
“Oh! oh! As to texts, look at history; it, is known that all the textshave been falsified by the Jesuits.”
Charles came in, and advancing towards the bed, slowly drew thecurtains.
Emma’s head was turned towards her right shoulder, the corner of hermouth, which was open, seemed like a black hole at the lower part of herface; her two thumbs were bent into the palms of her hands; a kindof white dust besprinkled her lashes, and her eyes were beginning todisappear in that viscous pallor that looks like a thin web, as ifspiders had spun it over. The sheet sunk in from her breast to herknees, and then rose at the tips of her toes, and it seemed to Charlesthat infinite masses, an enormous load, were weighing upon her.
The church clock struck two. They could hear the loud murmur of theriver flowing in the darkness at the foot of the terrace. MonsieurBournisien from time to time blew his nose noisily, and Homais’ pen wasscratching over the paper.
“Come, my good friend,” he said, “withdraw; this spectacle is tearingyou to pieces.”
Charles once gone, the chemist and the cure recommenced theirdiscussions.
“Read Voltaire,” said the one, “read D’Holbach, read the‘Encyclopaedia’!”
“Read the ‘Letters of some Portuguese Jews,’” said the other; “read ‘TheMeaning of Christianity,’ by Nicolas, formerly a magistrate.”
They grew warm, they grew red, they both talked at once withoutlistening to each other. Bournisien was scandalized at such audacity;Homais marvelled at such stupidity; and they were on the point ofinsulting one another when Charles suddenly reappeared. A fascinationdrew him. He was continually coming upstairs.
He stood opposite her, the better to see her, and he lost himself in acontemplation so deep that it was no longer painful.
He recalled stories of catalepsy, the marvels of magnetism, and hesaid to himself that by willing it with all his force he might perhapssucceed in reviving her. Once he even bent towards he, and cried in alow voice, “Emma! Emma!” His strong breathing made the flames of thecandles tremble against the wall.
At daybreak Madame Bovary senior arrived. Charles as he embraced herburst into another flood of tears. She tried, as the chemist had done,to make some remarks to him on the expenses of the funeral. He became soangry that she was silent, and he even commissioned her to go to town atonce and buy what was necessary.
Charles remained alone the whole afternoon; they had taken Bertheto Madame Homais’; Félicité was in the room upstairs with MadameLefrancois.
In the evening he had some visitors. He rose, pressed their hands,unable to speak. Then they sat down near one another, and formed a largesemicircle in front of the fire. With lowered faces, and swinging oneleg crossed over the other knee, they uttered deep sighs at intervals;each one was inordinately bored, and yet none would be the first to go.
Homais, when he returned at nine o’clock (for the last two days onlyHomais seemed to have been on the Place), was laden with a stock ofcamphor, of benzine, and aromatic herbs. He also carried a large jarfull of chlorine water, to keep off all miasmata. Just then the servant,Madame Lefrancois, and Madame Bovary senior were busy about Emma,finishing dressing her, and they were drawing down the long stiff veilthat covered her to her satin shoes.
Félicité was sobbing--“Ah! my poor mistress! my poor mistress!”
“Look at her,” said the landlady, sighing; “how pretty she still is!Now, couldn’t you swear she was going to get up in a minute?”
Then they bent over her to put on her wreath. They had to raise the heada little, and a rush of black liquid issued, as if she were vomiting,from her mouth.
“Oh, goodness! The dress; take care!” cried Madame Lefrancois. “Now,just come and help,” she said to the chemist. “Perhaps you’re afraid?”
“I afraid?” replied he, shrugging his shoulders. “I dare say! I’ve seenall sorts of things at the hospital when I was studying pharmacy. Weused to make punch in the dissecting room! Nothingness does not terrifya philosopher; and, as I often say, I even intend to leave my body tothe hospitals, in order, later on, to serve science.”
The cure on his arrival inquired how Monsieur Bovary was, and, onthe reply of the druggist, went on--“The blow, you see, is still toorecent.”
Then Homais congratulated him on not being exposed, like other people,to the loss of a beloved companion; whence there followed a discussionon the celibacy of priests.
“For,” said the chemist, “it is unnatural that a man should do withoutwomen! There have been crimes--”
“But, good heaven!” cried the ecclesiastic, “how do you expect anindividual who is married to keep the secrets of the confessional, forexample?”
Homais fell foul of the confessional. Bournisien defended it; heenlarged on the acts of restitution that it brought about. He citedvarious anecdotes about thieves who had suddenly become honest. Militarymen on approaching the tribunal of penitence had felt the scales fallfrom their eyes. At Fribourg there was a minister--
His companion was asleep. Then he felt somewhat stifled by theover-heavy atmosphere of the room; he opened the window; this awoke thechemist.
“Come, take a pinch of snuff,” he said to him. “Take it; it’ll relieveyou.”
A continual barking was heard in the distance. “Do you hear that doghowling?” said the chemist.
“They smell the dead,” replied the priest. “It’s like bees; they leavetheir hives on the decease of any person.”
Homais made no remark upon these prejudices, for he had again droppedasleep. Monsieur Bournisien, stronger than he, went on moving his lipsgently for some time, then insensibly his chin sank down, he let fallhis big black boot, and began to snore.
They sat opposite one another, with protruding stomachs, puffed-upfaces, and frowning looks, after so much disagreement uniting at last inthe same human weakness, and they moved no more than the corpse by theirside, that seemed to be sleeping.
Charles coming in did not wake them. It was the last time; he came tobid her farewell.
The aromatic herbs were still smoking, and spirals of bluish vapourblended at the window-sash with the fog that was coming in. There werefew stars, and the night was warm. The wax of the candles fell in greatdrops upon the sheets of the bed. Charles watched them burn, tiring hiseyes against the glare of their yellow flame.
The watering on the satin gown shimmered white as moonlight. Emma waslost beneath it; and it seemed to him that, spreading beyond her ownself, she blended confusedly with everything around her--the silence,the night, the passing wind, the damp odours rising from the ground.
Then suddenly he saw her in the garden at Tostes, on a bench against thethorn hedge, or else at Rouen in the streets, on the threshold of theirhouse, in the yard at Bertaux. He again heard the laughter of the happyboys beneath the apple-trees: the room was filled with the perfumeof her hair; and her dress rustled in his arms with a noise likeelectricity. The dress was still the same.
For a long while he thus recalled all his lost joys, her attitudes,her movements, the sound of her voice. Upon one fit of despair followedanother, and even others, inexhaustible as the waves of an overflowingsea.
A terrible curiosity seized him. Slowly, with the tips of his fingers,palpitating, he lifted her veil. But he uttered a cry of horror thatawoke the other two.
They dragged him down into the sitting-room. Then Félicité came up tosay that he wanted some of her hair.
“Cut some off,” replied the druggist.
And as she did not dare to, he himself stepped forward, scissors inhand. He trembled so that he pierced the skin of the temple in severalplaces. At last, stiffening himself against emotion, Homais gave twoor three great cuts at random that left white patches amongst thatbeautiful black hair.
The chemist and the cure plunged anew into their occupations, notwithout sleeping from time to time, of which they accused each otherreciprocally at each fresh awakening. Then Monsieur Bournisien sprinkledthe room with holy water and Homais threw a little chlorine water on thefloor.
Félicité had taken care to put on the chest of drawers, for eachof them, a bottle of brandy, some cheese, and a large roll. And thedruggist, who could not hold out any longer, about four in the morningsighed--
“My word! I should like to take some sustenance.”
The priest did not need any persuading; he went out to go and say mass,came back, and then they ate and hobnobbed, giggling a little withoutknowing why, stimulated by that vague gaiety that comes upon us aftertimes of sadness, and at the last glass the priest said to the druggist,as he clapped him on the shoulder--
“We shall end by understanding one another.”
In the passage downstairs they met the undertaker’s men, who were comingin. Then Charles for two hours had to suffer the torture of hearing thehammer resound against the wood. Next day they lowered her into heroak coffin, that was fitted into the other two; but as the bier wastoo large, they had to fill up the gaps with the wool of a mattress. Atlast, when the three lids had been planed down, nailed, soldered, it wasplaced outside in front of the door; the house was thrown open, and thepeople of Yonville began to flock round.
Old Rouault arrived, and fainted on the Place when he saw the blackcloth!
Chapter Ten
He had only received the chemist’s letter thirty-six hours after theevent; and, from consideration for his feelings, Homais had so worded itthat it was impossible to make out what it was all about.
First, the old fellow had fallen as if struck by apoplexy. Next, heunderstood that she was not dead, but she might be. At last, he had puton his blouse, taken his hat, fastened his spurs to his boots, and setout at full speed; and the whole of the way old Rouault, panting, wastorn by anguish. Once even he was obliged to dismount. He was dizzy; heheard voices round about him; he felt himself going mad.
Day broke. He saw three black hens asleep in a tree. He shuddered,horrified at this omen. Then he promised the Holy Virgin three chasublesfor the church, and that he would go barefooted from the cemetery atBertaux to the chapel of Vassonville.
He entered Maromme shouting for the people of the inn, burst open thedoor with a thrust of his shoulder, made for a sack of oats, emptied abottle of sweet cider into the manger, and again mounted his nag, whosefeet struck fire as it dashed along.
He said to himself that no doubt they would save her; the doctors woulddiscover some remedy surely. He remembered all the miraculous cureshe had been told about. Then she appeared to him dead. She was there;before his eyes, lying on her back in the middle of the road. He reinedup, and the hallucination disappeared.
At Quincampoix, to give himself heart, he drank three cups of coffeeone after the other. He fancied they had made a mistake in the name inwriting. He looked for the letter in his pocket, felt it there, but didnot dare to open it.
At last he began to think it was all a joke; someone’s spite, the jestof some wag; and besides, if she were dead, one would have known it. Butno! There was nothing extraordinary about the country; the sky was blue,the trees swayed; a flock of sheep passed. He saw the village; he wasseen coming bending forward upon his horse, belabouring it with greatblows, the girths dripping with blood.
When he had recovered consciousness, he fell, weeping, into Bovary’sarms: “My girl! Emma! my child! tell me--”
The other replied, sobbing, “I don’t know! I don’t know! It’s a curse!”
The druggist separated them. “These horrible details are useless. I willtell this gentleman all about it. Here are the people coming. Dignity!Come now! Philosophy!”
The poor fellow tried to show himself brave, and repeated several times.“Yes! courage!”
“Oh,” cried the old man, “so I will have, by God! I’ll go along o’ herto the end!”
The bell began tolling. All was ready; they had to start. And seated ina stall of the choir, side by side, they saw pass and repass in front ofthem continually the three chanting choristers.
The serpent-player was blowing with all his might. Monsieur Bournisien,in full vestments, was singing in a shrill voice. He bowed before thetabernacle, raising his hands, stretched out his arms. Lestiboudoiswent about the church with his whalebone stick. The bier stood near thelectern, between four rows of candles. Charles felt inclined to get upand put them out.
Yet he tried to stir himself to a feeling of devotion, to throw himselfinto the hope of a future life in which he should see her again. Heimagined to himself she had gone on a long journey, far away, for a longtime. But when he thought of her lying there, and that all was over,that they would lay her in the earth, he was seized with a fierce,gloomy, despairful rage. At times he thought he felt nothing more, andhe enjoyed this lull in his pain, whilst at the same time he reproachedhimself for being a wretch.
The sharp noise of an iron-ferruled stick was heard on the stones,striking them at irregular intervals. It came from the end of thechurch, and stopped short at the lower aisles. A man in a coarse brownjacket knelt down painfully. It was Hippolyte, the stable-boy at the“Lion d’Or.” He had put on his new leg.
One of the choristers went round the nave making a collection, and thecoppers chinked one after the other on the silver plate.
“Oh, make haste! I am in pain!” cried Bovary, angrily throwing him afive-franc piece. The churchman thanked him with a deep bow.
They sang, they knelt, they stood up; it was endless! He remembered thatonce, in the early times, they had been to mass together, and they hadsat down on the other side, on the right, by the wall. The bell beganagain. There was a great moving of chairs; the bearers slipped theirthree staves under the coffin, and everyone left the church.
Then Justin appeared at the door of the shop. He suddenly went in again,pale, staggering.
People were at the windows to see the procession pass. Charles at thehead walked erect. He affected a brave air, and saluted with a nod thosewho, coming out from the lanes or from their doors, stood amidst thecrowd.
The six men, three on either side, walked slowly, panting a little. Thepriests, the choristers, and the two choirboys recited the _Deprofundis_,[22] and their voices echoed over the fields, rising andfalling with their undulations. Sometimes they disappeared in thewindings of the path; but the great silver cross rose always before thetrees.
[22] Psalm CXXX.
The women followed in black cloaks with turned-down hoods; each of themcarried in her hands a large lighted candle, and Charles felt himselfgrowing weaker at this continual repetition of prayers and torches,beneath this oppressive odour of wax and of cassocks. A fresh breeze wasblowing; the rye and colza were sprouting, little dewdrops trembled atthe roadsides and on the hawthorn hedges. All sorts of joyous soundsfilled the air; the jolting of a cart rolling afar off in the ruts, thecrowing of a cock, repeated again and again, or the gambling of a foalrunning away under the apple-trees: The pure sky was fretted with rosyclouds; a bluish haze rested upon the cots covered with iris. Charles ashe passed recognised each courtyard. He remembered mornings like this,when, after visiting some patient, he came out from one and returned toher.
The black cloth bestrewn with white beads blew up from time to time,laying bare the coffin. The tired bearers walked more slowly, and itadvanced with constant jerks, like a boat that pitches with every wave.
They reached the cemetery. The men went right down to a place in thegrass where a grave was dug. They ranged themselves all round; and whilethe priest spoke, the red soil thrown up at the sides kept noiselesslyslipping down at the corners.
Then when the four ropes were arranged the coffin was placed upon them.He watched it descend; it seemed descending for ever. At last a thud washeard; the ropes creaked as they were drawn up. Then Bournisien tookthe spade handed to him by Lestiboudois; with his left hand all thetime sprinkling water, with the right he vigorously threw in a largespadeful; and the wood of the coffin, struck by the pebbles, gave forththat dread sound that seems to us the reverberation of eternity.
The ecclesiastic passed the holy water sprinkler to his neighbour. Thiswas Homais. He swung it gravely, then handed it to Charles, who sank tohis knees in the earth and threw in handfuls of it, crying, “Adieu!” Hesent her kisses; he dragged himself towards the grave, to engulf himselfwith her. They led him away, and he soon grew calmer, feeling perhaps,like the others, a vague satisfaction that it was all over.
Old Rouault on his way back began quietly smoking a pipe, which Homaisin his innermost conscience thought not quite the thing. He also noticedthat Monsieur Binet had not been present, and that Tuvache had “madeoff” after mass, and that Theodore, the notary’s servant wore a bluecoat, “as if one could not have got a black coat, since that is thecustom, by Jove!” And to share his observations with others he went fromgroup to group. They were deploring Emma’s death, especially Lheureux,who had not failed to come to the funeral.
“Poor little woman! What a trouble for her husband!”
The druggist continued, “Do you know that but for me he would havecommitted some fatal attempt upon himself?”
“Such a good woman! To think that I saw her only last Saturday in myshop.”
“I haven’t had leisure,” said Homais, “to prepare a few words that Iwould have cast upon her tomb.”
Charles on getting home undressed, and old Rouault put on his blueblouse. It was a new one, and as he had often during the journey wipedhis eyes on the sleeves, the dye had stained his face, and the traces oftears made lines in the layer of dust that covered it.
Madame Bovary senior was with them. All three were silent. At last theold fellow sighed--
“Do you remember, my friend, that I went to Tostes once when you hadjust lost your first deceased? I consoled you at that time. I thought ofsomething to say then, but now--” Then, with a loud groan that shook hiswhole chest, “Ah! this is the end for me, do you see! I saw my wife go,then my son, and now to-day it’s my daughter.”
He wanted to go back at once to Bertaux, saying that he could not sleepin this house. He even refused to see his granddaughter.
“No, no! It would grieve me too much. Only you’ll kiss her many timesfor me. Good-bye! you’re a good fellow! And then I shall never forgetthat,” he said, slapping his thigh. “Never fear, you shall always haveyour turkey.”
But when he reached the top of the hill he turned back, as he had turnedonce before on the road of Saint-Victor when he had parted from her. Thewindows of the village were all on fire beneath the slanting rays of thesun sinking behind the field. He put his hand over his eyes, and sawin the horizon an enclosure of walls, where trees here and there formedblack clusters between white stones; then he went on his way at a gentletrot, for his nag had gone lame.
Despite their fatigue, Charles and his mother stayed very long thatevening talking together. They spoke of the days of the past and of thefuture. She would come to live at Yonville; she would keep house forhim; they would never part again. She was ingenious and caressing,rejoicing in her heart at gaining once more an affection that hadwandered from her for so many years. Midnight struck. The village asusual was silent, and Charles, awake, thought always of her.
Rodolphe, who, to distract himself, had been rambling about the wood allday, was sleeping quietly in his château, and Léon, down yonder, alwaysslept.
There was another who at that hour was not asleep.
On the grave between the pine-trees a child was on his knees weeping,and his heart, rent by sobs, was beating in the shadow beneath the loadof an immense regret, sweeter than the moon and fathomless as the night.The gate suddenly grated. It was Lestiboudois; he came to fetch hisspade, that he had forgotten. He recognised Justin climbing over thewall, and at last knew who was the culprit who stole his potatoes.
Chapter Eleven
The next day Charles had the child brought back. She asked for hermamma. They told her she was away; that she would bring her back someplaythings. Berthe spoke of her again several times, then at lastthought no more of her. The child’s gaiety broke Bovary’s heart, and hehad to bear besides the intolerable consolations of the chemist.
Money troubles soon began again, Monsieur Lheureux urging on anew hisfriend Vincart, and Charles pledged himself for exorbitant sums; for hewould never consent to let the smallest of the things that had belongedto HER be sold. His mother was exasperated with him; he grew even moreangry than she did. He had altogether changed. She left the house.
Then everyone began “taking advantage” of him. Mademoiselle Lempereurpresented a bill for six months’ teaching, although Emma had never takena lesson (despite the receipted bill she had shown Bovary); it was anarrangement between the two women. The man at the circulating librarydemanded three years’ subscriptions; Mere Rollet claimed the postage duefor some twenty letters, and when Charles asked for an explanation, shehad the delicacy to reply--
“Oh, I don’t know. It was for her business affairs.”
With every debt he paid Charles thought he had come to the end of them.But others followed ceaselessly. He sent in accounts for professionalattendance. He was shown the letters his wife had written. Then he hadto apologise.
Félicité now wore Madame Bovary’s gowns; not all, for he had kept someof them, and he went to look at them in her dressing-room, lockinghimself up there; she was about her height, and often Charles, seeingher from behind, was seized with an illusion, and cried out--
“Oh, stay, stay!”
But at Whitsuntide she ran away from Yonville, carried off by Theodore,stealing all that was left of the wardrobe.
It was about this time that the widow Dupuis had the honour to informhim of the “marriage of Monsieur Léon Dupuis her son, notary at Yvetot,to Mademoiselle Leocadie Leboeuf of Bondeville.” Charles, among theother congratulations he sent him, wrote this sentence--
“How glad my poor wife would have been!”
One day when, wandering aimlessly about the house, he had gone up to theattic, he felt a pellet of fine paper under his slipper. He opened itand read: “Courage, Emma, courage. I would not bring misery into yourlife.” It was Rodolphe’s letter, fallen to the ground between the boxes,where it had remained, and that the wind from the dormer window had justblown towards the door. And Charles stood, motionless and staring, inthe very same place where, long ago, Emma, in despair, and paler eventhan he, had thought of dying. At last he discovered a small R at thebottom of the second page. What did this mean? He remembered Rodolphe’sattentions, his sudden, disappearance, his constrained air when theyhad met two or three times since. But the respectful tone of the letterdeceived him.
“Perhaps they loved one another platonically,” he said to himself.
Besides, Charles was not of those who go to the bottom of things; heshrank from the proofs, and his vague jealousy was lost in the immensityof his woe.
Everyone, he thought, must have adored her; all men assuredly must havecoveted her. She seemed but the more beautiful to him for this; hewas seized with a lasting, furious desire for her, that inflamed hisdespair, and that was boundless, because it was now unrealisable.
To please her, as if she were still living, he adopted herpredilections, her ideas; he bought patent leather boots and took towearing white cravats. He put cosmetics on his moustache, and, like her,signed notes of hand. She corrupted him from beyond the grave.
He was obliged to sell his silver piece by piece; next he sold thedrawing-room furniture. All the rooms were stripped; but the bedroom,her own room, remained as before. After his dinner Charles went upthere. He pushed the round table in front of the fire, and drew up herarmchair. He sat down opposite it. A candle burnt in one of the giltcandlesticks. Berthe by his side was painting prints.
He suffered, poor man, at seeing her so badly dressed, with lacelessboots, and the arm-holes of her pinafore torn down to the hips; for thecharwoman took no care of her. But she was so sweet, so pretty, and herlittle head bent forward so gracefully, letting the dear fair hair fallover her rosy cheeks, that an infinite joy came upon him, a happinessmingled with bitterness, like those ill-made wines that taste ofresin. He mended her toys, made her puppets from cardboard, or sewed uphalf-torn dolls. Then, if his eyes fell upon the workbox, a ribbon lyingabout, or even a pin left in a crack of the table, he began to dream,and looked so sad that she became as sad as he.
No one now came to see them, for Justin had run away to Rouen, where hewas a grocer’s assistant, and the druggist’s children saw less and lessof the child, Monsieur Homais not caring, seeing the difference of theirsocial position, to continue the intimacy.
The blind man, whom he had not been able to cure with the pomade, hadgone back to the hill of Bois-Guillaume, where he told the travellers ofthe vain attempt of the druggist, to such an extent, that Homais whenhe went to town hid himself behind the curtains of the “Hirondelle” toavoid meeting him. He detested him, and wishing, in the interests of hisown reputation, to get rid of him at all costs, he directed againsthim a secret battery, that betrayed the depth of his intellect and thebaseness of his vanity. Thus, for six consecutive months, one could readin the “Fanal de Rouen” editorials such as these--
“All who bend their steps towards the fertile plains of Picardy have, nodoubt, remarked, by the Bois-Guillaume hill, a wretch suffering froma horrible facial wound. He importunes, persecutes one, and levies aregular tax on all travellers. Are we still living in the monstroustimes of the Middle Ages, when vagabonds were permitted to display inour public places leprosy and scrofulas they had brought back from theCrusades?”
Or--
“In spite of the laws against vagabondage, the approaches to our greattowns continue to be infected by bands of beggars. Some are seen goingabout alone, and these are not, perhaps, the least dangerous. What areour ediles about?”
Then Homais invented anecdotes--
“Yesterday, by the Bois-Guillaume hill, a skittish horse--” And thenfollowed the story of an accident caused by the presence of the blindman.
He managed so well that the fellow was locked up. But he was released.He began again, and Homais began again. It was a struggle. Homais wonit, for his foe was condemned to life-long confinement in an asylum.
This success emboldened him, and henceforth there was no longer a dogrun over, a barn burnt down, a woman beaten in the parish, of whichhe did not immediately inform the public, guided always by the love ofprogress and the hate of priests. He instituted comparisons between theelementary and clerical schools to the detriment of the latter; calledto mind the massacre of St. Bartholomew a propos of a grant of onehundred francs to the church, and denounced abuses, aired new views.That was his phrase. Homais was digging and delving; he was becomingdangerous.
However, he was stifling in the narrow limits of journalism, and soon abook, a work was necessary to him. Then he composed “General Statisticsof the Canton of Yonville, followed by Climatological Remarks.” Thestatistics drove him to philosophy. He busied himself with greatquestions: the social problem, moralisation of the poorer classes,pisciculture, caoutchouc, railways, etc. He even began to blush at beinga bourgeois. He affected the artistic style, he smoked. He bought twochic Pompadour statuettes to adorn his drawing-room.
He by no means gave up his shop. On the contrary, he kept well abreastof new discoveries. He followed the great movement of chocolates; hewas the first to introduce “cocoa” and “revalenta” into theSeine-Inferieure. He was enthusiastic about the hydro-electricPulvermacher chains; he wore one himself, and when at night he took offhis flannel vest, Madame Homais stood quite dazzled before the goldenspiral beneath which he was hidden, and felt her ardour redouble forthis man more bandaged than a Scythian, and splendid as one of the Magi.
He had fine ideas about Emma’s tomb. First he proposed a broken columnwith some drapery, next a pyramid, then a Temple of Vesta, a sort ofrotunda, or else a “mass of ruins.” And in all his plans Homais alwaysstuck to the weeping willow, which he looked upon as the indispensablesymbol of sorrow.
Charles and he made a journey to Rouen together to look at some tombsat a funeral furnisher’s, accompanied by an artist, one Vaufrylard, afriend of Bridoux’s, who made puns all the time. At last, after havingexamined some hundred designs, having ordered an estimate and madeanother journey to Rouen, Charles decided in favour of a mausoleum,which on the two principal sides was to have a “spirit bearing anextinguished torch.”
As to the inscription, Homais could think of nothing so fine as _Staviator_,[23] and he got no further; he racked his brain, he constantlyrepeated _Sta viator_. At last he hit upon _Amabilen conjugemcalcas_,[24] which was adopted.
[23] Rest traveler.
[24] Tread upon a loving wife.
A strange thing was that Bovary, while continually thinking of Emma, wasforgetting her. He grew desperate as he felt this image fading from hismemory in spite of all efforts to retain it. Yet every night he dreamtof her; it was always the same dream. He drew near her, but when he wasabout to clasp her she fell into decay in his arms.
For a week he was seen going to church in the evening. MonsieurBournisien even paid him two or three visits, then gave him up.Moreover, the old fellow was growing intolerant, fanatic, said Homais.He thundered against the spirit of the age, and never failed, everyother week, in his sermon, to recount the death agony of Voltaire, whodied devouring his excrements, as everyone knows.
In spite of the economy with which Bovary lived, he was far from beingable to pay off his old debts. Lheureux refused to renew any morebills. A distraint became imminent. Then he appealed to his mother, whoconsented to let him take a mortgage on her property, but with a greatmany recriminations against Emma; and in return for her sacrifice sheasked for a shawl that had escaped the depredations of Félicité. Charlesrefused to give it her; they quarrelled.
She made the first overtures of reconciliation by offering to have thelittle girl, who could help her in the house, to live with her. Charlesconsented to this, but when the time for parting came, all his couragefailed him. Then there was a final, complete rupture.
As his affections vanished, he clung more closely to the love of hischild. She made him anxious, however, for she coughed sometimes, and hadred spots on her cheeks.
Opposite his house, flourishing and merry, was the family of thechemist, with whom everything was prospering. Napoleon helped him in thelaboratory, Athalie embroidered him a skullcap, Irma cut out rounds ofpaper to cover the preserves, and Franklin recited Pythagoras’ table ina breath. He was the happiest of fathers, the most fortunate of men.
Not so! A secret ambition devoured him. Homais hankered after the crossof the Legion of Honour. He had plenty of claims to it.
“First, having at the time of the cholera distinguished myself by aboundless devotion; second, by having published, at my expense,various works of public utility, such as” (and he recalled his pamphletentitled, “Cider, its manufacture and effects,” besides observationon the lanigerous plant-louse, sent to the Academy; his volume ofstatistics, and down to his pharmaceutical thesis); “without countingthat I am a member of several learned societies” (he was member of asingle one).
“In short!” he cried, making a pirouette, “if it were only fordistinguishing myself at fires!”
Then Homais inclined towards the Government. He secretly did theprefect great service during the elections. He sold himself--in a word,prostituted himself. He even addressed a petition to the sovereignin which he implored him to “do him justice”; he called him “our goodking,” and compared him to Henri IV.
And every morning the druggist rushed for the paper to see if hisnomination were in it. It was never there. At last, unable to bear itany longer, he had a grass plot in his garden designed to represent theStar of the Cross of Honour with two little strips of grass running fromthe top to imitate the ribband. He walked round it with folded arms,meditating on the folly of the Government and the ingratitude of men.
From respect, or from a sort of sensuality that made him carry on hisinvestigations slowly, Charles had not yet opened the secret drawer ofa rosewood desk which Emma had generally used. One day, however, hesat down before it, turned the key, and pressed the spring. All Léon’sletters were there. There could be no doubt this time. He devoured themto the very last, ransacked every corner, all the furniture, all thedrawers, behind the walls, sobbing, crying aloud, distraught, mad. Hefound a box and broke it open with a kick. Rodolphe’s portrait flew fullin his face in the midst of the overturned love-letters.
People wondered at his despondency. He never went out, saw no one,refused even to visit his patients. Then they said “he shut himself upto drink.”
Sometimes, however, some curious person climbed on to the garden hedge,and saw with amazement this long-bearded, shabbily clothed, wild man,who wept aloud as he walked up and down.
In the evening in summer he took his little girl with him and led her tothe cemetery. They came back at nightfall, when the only light left inthe Place was that in Binet’s window.
The voluptuousness of his grief was, however, incomplete, for he had noone near him to share it, and he paid visits to Madame Lefrancois to beable to speak of her.
But the landlady only listened with half an ear, having troubleslike himself. For Lheureux had at last established the “Favorites duCommerce,” and Hivert, who enjoyed a great reputation for doing errands,insisted on a rise of wages, and was threatening to go over “to theopposition shop.”
One day when he had gone to the market at Argueil to sell his horse--hislast resource--he met Rodolphe.
They both turned pale when they caught sight of one another. Rodolphe,who had only sent his card, first stammered some apologies, then grewbolder, and even pushed his assurance (it was in the month of August andvery hot) to the length of inviting him to have a bottle of beer at thepublic-house.
Leaning on the table opposite him, he chewed his cigar as he talked, andCharles was lost in reverie at this face that she had loved. He seemedto see again something of her in it. It was a marvel to him. He wouldhave liked to have been this man.
The other went on talking agriculture, cattle, pasturage, filling outwith banal phrases all the gaps where an allusion might slip in. Charleswas not listening to him; Rodolphe noticed it, and he followed thesuccession of memories that crossed his face. This gradually grewredder; the nostrils throbbed fast, the lips quivered. There was atlast a moment when Charles, full of a sombre fury, fixed his eyes onRodolphe, who, in something of fear, stopped talking. But soon the samelook of weary lassitude came back to his face.
“I don’t blame you,” he said.
Rodolphe was dumb. And Charles, his head in his hands, went on in abroken voice, and with the resigned accent of infinite sorrow--
“No, I don’t blame you now.”
He even added a fine phrase, the only one he ever made--
“It is the fault of fatality!”
Rodolphe, who had managed the fatality, thought the remark very offhandfrom a man in his position, comic even, and a little mean.
The next day Charles went to sit down on the seat in the arbour. Raysof light were straying through the trellis, the vine leaves threw theirshadows on the sand, the jasmines perfumed the air, the heavens wereblue, Spanish flies buzzed round the lilies in bloom, and Charles wassuffocating like a youth beneath the vague love influences that filledhis aching heart.
At seven o’clock little Berthe, who had not seen him all the afternoon,went to fetch him to dinner.
His head was thrown back against the wall, his eyes closed, his mouthopen, and in his hand was a long tress of black hair.
“Come along, papa,” she said.
And thinking he wanted to play; she pushed him gently. He fell to theground. He was dead.
Thirty-six hours after, at the druggist’s request, Monsieur Canivet camethither. He made a post-mortem and found nothing.
When everything had been sold, twelve francs seventy-five centimesremained, that served to pay for Mademoiselle Bovary’s going toher grandmother. The good woman died the same year; old Rouault wasparalysed, and it was an aunt who took charge of her. She is poor, andsends her to a cotton-factory to earn a living.
Since Bovary’s death three doctors have followed one another at Yonvillewithout any success, so severely did Homais attack them. He has anenormous practice; the authorities treat him with consideration, andpublic opinion protects him.
He has just received the cross of the Legion of Honour.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADAME BOVARY ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where  you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation."
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.org
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

